== はじめに ==
僕が「シスアドが世界を支配するとき」の執筆を開始したのは2005年7月6日だった。そのころクラリオンワークショップで講師を勤めてた。
その次の日、ロンドンで地下鉄とバスが爆破された。
爆破されたバスには僕が毎朝仕事に行くのに使ってるのもあった。
幸運にもその日、僕はクラリオンワークショップに呼ばれてミシガン州にいて助かった。
作家でなくてもこの幸運を奇妙に思うだろう。
僕はショックでこの話の執筆を数ヵ月間進めることができなくなった。

<!-- 
I started writing When Sysadmins Ruled the Earth on July 6th, 2005, while teaching Clarion. The next day, the London Underground and busses were bombed, including the bus I rode to work every morning (I was in Michigan, teaching Clarion, thankfully). These kinds of coincidences can be spooky when you’re a writer. I ended up putting the story away for some months.
-->

執筆にもどると、世界がオフラインになりつつある中でサーバをオンラインにし続けようと得意気に奮闘するフィリックスとヴァンの話に俄然やる気がでてきた。
一度作られたキョーレツな不安は消すことができない。
僕なんか80年代の核戦争の不安があって、Y2K、気候変動みたいな空想上の不安なか大きくなった。
この話も世界にふりかかる危機の話だ。

<!--
When I returned to it, I was fired anew with the story of Felix and Van and their vainglorious struggle to keep the servers online as the world went offline. Once created, apocalyptic anxiety can’t be destroyed — the 1980s fear of nuclear annihilation I grew up with surfaces anew with each theoretical disaster: Y2K, climate change, und zo weiter. There’s something primal about a story of the Earth’s impending doom.
-->

僕自身、若いころシスアドだった。
今でもシスアドの仕事に敬意を持ってる。
シスアドは秘密の世界の管理者で、僕らの生活を支えてくれてるんだ。

<!-- 
I was a sysadmin at an earlier stage in my career and I have infinite respect for the field: sysadmins are the secret masters of the universe, and they keep you life running
-->

* クラリオンワークショップ SF作家志望のためのワークショップ

== 本文 ==
=== 一章 ===
午前2時、フェリックスの仕事用の携帯電話が鳴った。

「どうして寝る前に電源を切っておこないのよ。」
ケリーは寝返りをうち、いらだたしげに彼の肩をこづいた。

「電話がかかってくるからだよ。」

ケリーはベッドサイドで寝る前に床に脱ぎ捨てておいたズボンを履いている彼をけりながら言った。

「医者でもなにのに。」

「シスアドなんて最悪。」

「それが仕事なんだよ。」

フェリックスは言った。

「公務員かなんかのようにこき使って...。あなたはもうパパなのよ。真夜中に誰かさんがアダルトサイトを見れなくったって放っておけばいいじゃない。切って。」

フェリックスは正論だと思ったが、携帯に出た。

「メインルータガハンノウシマセン。BGPニハンノウシマセン。」

合成音声が答えた。
フェリックスはわざと悪態をつき、嫌な気分をまぎらわせた。

フェリックスはケリーに言った。
「家から直せるかもしれないよ。」
彼はラックのUPSにログインしてルータをリブートできた。
UPSは異なるネットワークセグメントにあり、そのUPSで電源供給している独立したルータを使っている。


ケリーはベットのヘッドボードにもたれ体を起こしているようだった。


「私と一緒になって5年、一度も家から直したことないじゃない。」

彼女は知らなかった。
フィリックスはいつも問題を解決していたけれでも、そのことを彼女に伝えていなかった。
今回は彼女の言うとおりだった。
午前1時からログを見るかぎり、データセンターのケージへ出かけるほかなかった。

統一無限いじわる法則。フィリックスの法則だ。


5分後、フィリックスはハンドルを握っていた。
彼は家からでは問題を解決できなかった。
問題のネットワークセグメントのルータが死んでいる。。
最後に同じような問題が起こったのは、バカな作業員がデータセンターへ通じるメインの配管を地下作業車でぶち抜いた時だ。
その時はフィリックスも工事用の穴の上で、一週間２４時間、復旧しようと1万本のワイヤーをつなげ直している工事業者をののしった50人の怒れるシスアドの一人だった。

携帯が2度鳴った。フィリックスは出力をカーステレオにつないだ。巨大なベーススピーカーが別の重要なネットワークの通信が途絶えたと報告する合成音声を流した。

3度目はケリーだった。

「もしもし。どうしたんだい？　声色が変だけど」
<!-- "Don't cringe, I can hear the cringe in your voice." -->

彼は無意識にほほえんだ。「冗談はよしてくれよ。」
<!-- He smiled involuntarily. "Check, no cringing." -->

「愛してるわ。フィリックス」
<!-- "I love you, Felix," she said. -->

「僕もだよ、ケリー。さあ、寝なきゃ。」
<!-- "I'm totally bonkers for you, Kelly. Go back to bed." -->

「2.0が起きてるの。」

フィリックスとケリーは、彼らの赤ちゃんを2.0と呼んでいた。
子宮でベータテストされ、ケリーが破水したとき、
連絡を受けたフィリックスは「正規版がリリースしたんだ」と騒ぎながら職場からかけつけた。
赤ちゃんが初めて泣き止む前には、彼らは彼を2.0と呼びはじめていた。

「この子はおっぱいを吸うために生まれてきたんだ。」
<!-- "2.0's awake," she said. The baby had been Beta Test when he was in her womb, and when her water broke, he got the call and dashed out of the office, shouting, 'The Gold Master just shipped!' They'd started calling him 2.0 before he'd finished his first cry. "This little bastard was born to suck tit." -->

「起こしちゃったんだね。」

彼はデータセンターに着くところだった。
午前2時に行き交う車は無い。
彼は車の速度を緩め、駐車場への入口に入る前に路肩によせた。
地下の駐車場へ入って、電話を切りたくなかった。

「私を起こしたわけではないわ。」

「7年間勤めてるんだもの。３人の部下がいるんでしょ。彼らに電話してまかせましょう? あなたはよく働いてるわ。」
<!-- "It's not waking me," she said. "You've been there for seven years. You have three juniors reporting to you. Give them the phone. You've paid your dues." -->

「自分が何もやってないことについての報告書なんて読めないよ。」
<!-- "I don't like asking my reports to do anything I wouldn't do," he said. -->

「そうね。」

「お願い。夜中に一人で起きているのは嫌だわ。帰ってきて。」
<!-- "You've done it," she said. "Please? I hate waking up alone in the night. I miss you most at night." -->

「ケリー...」
<!-- "Kelly—" -->

「怒ってももなんにもならないのはわかってるの。ただ、あなたに一緒にいてほしいのよ。あなたといっしょに寝るといい夢が見られるの。」
<!-- "I'm over being angry. I just miss you is all. You give me sweet dreams." -->

「わかったよ。」
<!-- "OK," he said. -->

「簡単でしょ？」
<!-- "Simple as that?" -->

「ああ、簡単だ。きみは一人で悪い夢は見ないよ。そして、僕は僕の仕事をする。これから電話して休暇を取るよ。」
<!-- "Exactly. Simple as that. Can't have you having bad dreams, and I've paid my dues. From now on, I'm only going on night call to cover holidays." -->

「シスアドに休暇なんてないわ。」
<!-- She laughed. "Sysadmins don't take holidays." -->

「かならずそうすよ。約束する。」
<!-- "This one will," he said. "Promise." -->

「素敵。」彼女は喜んだ。
<!-- "You're wonderful," she said. "Oh, gross. 2.0 just dumped core all over my bathrobe." -->


「あらやだ。2.0が私のバスローブにコアダンプを吐いちゃったわ。」
<!-- "You're wonderful," she said. "Oh, gross. 2.0 just dumped core all over my bathrobe." -->

「赤ちゃんが?」
<!-- "That's my boy," he said. -->

「そうなの。」

彼女が電話を切ったので、フィリックスは車を駐車場へ入れ、入館認証へ向かった。
眠気が残った眼球がちょっとでも良くみえるように、目を見開いて網膜スキャンをおこなった。
<!-- "Oh that he is," she said. She hung up, and he piloted the car into the data-center lot, badging in and peeling up a bleary eyelid to let the retinal scanner get a good look at his sleep-depped eyeball. -->

彼は立ち止まり、
He stopped at the machine to get himself a guarana/medafonil power-bar and a cup of lethal robot-coffee in a spill-proof clean-room sippy-cup. 
彼は荒々しく、バーをはねのけ、コーヒーを一口すすった。そして内側のドアが彼の手の起伏を読み取り、彼を計測した。シューという音と共にドアは開き、エアロックの気圧差で彼は聖域に押し出された。
<!-- He wolfed down the bar and sipped the coffee, then let the inner door read his hand-geometry and size him up for a moment. It sighed open and gusted the airlock's load of positively pressurized air over him as he passed finally to the inner sanctum. -->

まるで精神病院だった。それぞれのラックは2から3人のシステム管理者が同時に作戦を実行できるように設計されていた。四角く区切られたパーティションはうなるサーバとルーター、ドライバーで一部の隙もなく、20人ものシステム管理者で息がつまりそうだった。システム管理者のスタイルは理解不能のスローガンが描かれた黒いTシャツと携帯電話と多機能工具をベルトに装着するのが定番だ。
<!-- It was bedlam. The cages were designed to let two or three sysadmins maneuver around them at a time. Every other inch of cubic space was given over to humming racks of servers and routers and drives. Jammed among them were no fewer than twenty other sysadmins. It was a regular convention of black tee-shirts with inexplicable slogans, bellies overlapping belts with phones and multitools. -->

通常、サーバールームは寒いぐらいだが、閉ざされた小さな空間にこの人数で、暑かった。
フィリックスが通り過ぎると、5、６人が顔をしかめた。
2人は彼に名前であいさつした。

<!-- Normally it was practically freezing in the cage, but all those bodies were overheating the small, enclosed space. Five or six looked up and grimaced when he came through. Two greeted him by name. He threaded his belly through the press and the cages, toward the Ardent racks in the back of the room. -->


「フィリックス」ヴァンが呼んだ。ヴァンは今日、電話番ではなかった。
<!-- "Felix." It was Van, who wasn't on call that night. -->

「どうしたんだよ。明日ボロボロになるのは一人だけでいいだろうに。」フィリックスは言った。
<!-- "What are you doing here?" he asked. "No need for both of us to be wrecked tomorrow." -->

「どうしたんだよって...。俺のがそれなんだ。1時半ごろに落っこちて、プロセス・モニターで起こされた。俺が行くってお前に電話しとけばよかったな。そうすりゃ、お前が出場ってくる必要はなかった。」
<!-- "What? Oh. My personal box is over there. It went down around 1:30 and I got woken up by my process-monitor.  I should have called you and told you I was coming down—spared you the trip." -->

友達５人と借りているフィリックスのサーバは一階下のラックだった。
フィリックスはこのサーバもオフラインなのか心配だった。
<!-- Felix's own server—a box he shared with five other friends—was in a rack one floor down. He wondered if it was offline too. -->

「何がおこってるんだ？」
<!-- "What's the story?" -->

「ワームだよ。どっかのマヌケ管理してたWindowsがゼロデイアタックを受けて、ネットワーク上のIP全てにモンテカルロ法で探査してんのさ。しかもIPV6も。基幹シスコの管理インターフェースがIPV6だろ。おまけに１０以上の同時探査を受けると通信を受付けなくなるんだぜ。で、すべてのネットワーク間通信がおじゃんてわけだ。さらにだ。DNSも調子おかしい。昨日の夜、だれかがゾーン転送をダメにしたみたいだし。そうだ。お前のアドレスブックにある全てのアドレスに送信されたメールとIM componentあったんだ。そのメールがアーカイブされてたメールのトロイの木馬を召喚するエリザの呪文を吐きやがったんだ。
<!-- "Massive flashworm attack. Some jackass with a zero-day exploit has got every Windows box on the net running Monte Carlo probes on every IP block, including IPv6. The big Ciscos all run administrative interfaces over v6, and they all fall over if they get more than ten simultaneous probes, which means that just about every interchange has gone down. DNS is screwy, too—like maybe someone poisoned the zone transfer last night. Oh, and there's an email and IM component that sends pretty lifelike messages to everyone in your address book, barfing up Eliza-dialog that keys off of your logged email and messages to get you to open a Trojan." -->

「最悪。」
<!-- "Jesus." -->

「まったく。」ヴァンは２番めのタイプのシスアドだ。伸長は１８０センチ。ポニーテールでbobbing Adam's apple。Tシャツの薄っぺらな胸には"CHOOSE YOUR WEAPON"(武器をとれ？)に多角形のロールプレイングゲームのサイコロがプリントしてある。
<!-- "Yeah." Van was a type-two sysadmin, over six feet tall, long pony-tail, bobbing Adam's apple. Over his toast-rack chest, his tee said CHOOSE YOUR WEAPON and featured a row of polyhedral RPG dice. -->

フィリックスは１番めのタイプのシスアドだった。平均より７、８０ポンドほど体重があったが、整えられた鬚が顎をおおている。彼のTシャツには"ハロー　クトゥルーHELLO CTHULHU"とあり、口のないかわいいハローキティ調のクトゥルーがプリントされていた。ヴァンとの付き合いはかれこれ１５年になる。Usenetで知り合って、トロントのFreenetの飲み会のf2f、スタートレックコンベンションで１、2回実際に会って、フィリックスはアーデントで彼を雇う関係になっていた。ヴァンは信頼でき、几帳面だった。電気技士として経験を積んでいて、日付時間ごとに自分がおこなった作業のすべてをノートに記録していた。
<!-- Felix was a type-one admin, with an extra seventy or eighty pounds all around the middle, and a neat but full beard that he wore over his extra chins. His tee said HELLO CTHULHU and featured a cute, mouthless, Hello-Kitty-style Cthulhu. They'd known each other for fifteen years, having met on Usenet, then f2f at Toronto Freenet beer-sessions, a Star Trek convention or two, and eventually Felix had hired Van to work under him at Ardent. Van was reliable and methodical. Trained as an electrical engineer, he kept a procession of spiral notebooks filled with the details of every step he'd ever taken, with time and date. -->

「今回のはレイヤー８の問題ってわけじゃないな。」ヴァンが言った。実際に問題が起きていた。添付ファイルのトロイの木馬は過去の遺物だった。誰も怪しげな添付ファイルなど開けなくなっていたからだ。しかし、Ciscoを喰い尽くすワームは経験不足の技術者のせいだった。
<!-- "Not even PEBKAC this time," Van said. Problem Exists Between Keyboard And Chair. Email trojans fell into that category—if people were smart enough not to open suspect attachments, email trojans would be a thing of the past. But worms that ate Cisco routers weren't a problem with the lusers—they were the fault of incompetent engineers. -->

「またマイクロソフトか。午前2時に出てくるといつもレイヤー８か、ものぐさマイクロソフトの問題だ。」
<!-- "No, it's Microsoft's fault," Felix said. "Any time I'm at work at 2AM, it's either PEBKAC or Microsloth."  -->


=== 第二 ===
結局、彼らはインターネットからルータを切り離した。
もちろん、フィリックスがその作業をおこなったわけではなかった。
でも、フィリックスも同じようにIPV6のインターフェースを無効にして、リブートしたいとは思っていた．
切り離したのはa couple bull-goose Bastard Operators From Hellだった。
彼らは核ミサイルの格納庫を開けるように同時に２つのキーを廻さなければならなかった。
<!-- 95 percent of the long distance traffic in Canada went through this building. 
It had better security than most Minuteman silos. -->

<!-- They ended up just unplugging the frigging routers from the Internet. Not Felix, of course, though he was itching to do it and get them rebooted after shutting down their IPv6 interfaces. It was done by a couple bull-goose Bastard Operators From Hell who had to turn two keys at once to get access to their cage—like guards in a Minuteman silo. 95 percent of the long distance traffic in Canada went through this building. It had better security than most Minuteman silos. -->

フィリックスとヴァンはすぐにArdentを復旧した。
<!-- They were being pounded by worm-probes—putting the routers back online just exposed the downstream cages to the attack. -->
インターネット上の全てのマシンがワームに汚染されて、新たに感染しているようだった。
フィリックスは数百回のタイムアウトの後、なんとかNISTとBugtraqにアクセスして、ワーム対策のカーネルパッチをダウンロードしてマシンに適用した。
午前１０時になろうとしていた。
he was hungry enough to eat the ass out of a dead bear,ほど空腹だったが、カーネルを再構築し、再起動して復旧した。
ヴァンのの長い指は管理コンソールのキーボードの上で舞い、彼の舌はそれぞれマシンの負荷状況を表示させるたびにつき出ていた。

<!-- Felix and Van got the Ardent boxes back online one at a time. They were being pounded by worm-probes—putting the routers back online just exposed the downstream cages to the attack. Every box on the Internet was drowning in worms, or creating worm-attacks, or both. Felix managed to get through to NIST and Bugtraq after about a hundred timeouts, and download some kernel patches that should reduce the load the worms put on the machines in his care. It was 10AM, and he was hungry enough to eat the ass out of a dead bear, but he recompiled his kernels and brought the machines back online. Van's long fingers flew over the administrative keyboard, his tongue protruding as he ran load-stats on each one. -->

「Greedoは200日間の連続稼働中だったのに...。」
Greedoは彼らがスターウォーズの登場人物にちなんで名付けたラックで最古参のマシンだった。
彼らはスマーフからマシンの名前をつけていて、スマーフが思いつかなくなると、マクドナルドにちなんだ名前をヴァンのノートから付けはじめていた。
<!-- "I had two hundred days of uptime on Greedo," Van said. Greedo was the oldest server in the rack, from the days when they'd named the boxes after Star Wars characters. Now they were all named after Smurfs, and they were running out of Smurfs and had started in on McDonaldland characters, starting with Van's laptop, Mayor McCheese. -->

「また記録はつくれるよ。」フィリックスは言った。
「下の階に５年以上の連続稼働中の486があるけど、再起動しなくちゃならないなんて...。」
<!-- "Greedo will rise again," Felix said. "I've got a 486 downstairs with over five years of uptime. It's going to break my heart to reboot it." -->

「486機って何につかってんの？」
<!-- "What the everlasting shit do you use a 486 for?" -->

「別に。5年間連続稼働中なんだ。まるでおばあちゃんを安楽死させるような気分だよ。」
<!-- "Nothing. But who shuts down a machine with five years uptime? That's like euthanizing your grandmother." -->

「腹へったな。」ヴァンが言った。
<!-- "I wanna eat," Van said. -->

「そうだな。」フィリックスは言った。
「お前のマシンを起動させて、で、俺の。そのあとレイクビューへ朝飯のピザ食ったら、あとは今日は休みだ。」
<!-- "Tell you what," Felix said. "We'll get your box up, then mine, then I'll take you to the Lakeview Lunch for breakfast pizzas and you can have the rest of the day off." -->

「出てくれるの」ヴァンが言った。
「文句の言いようもないよ。上司って言えば、職場でこき使うもんだろ。それが、こんなに寛大だなんて。」
<!-- "You're on," Van said. "Man, you're too good to us grunts. You should keep us in a pit and beat us like all the other bosses. It's all we deserve." -->

=== 第三 ===

「電話だよ」ヴァンが言った。
フィリックスは486から出てきた。
電源が入らなかったので、スパムの対処に追われている他のシスアドから予備電源を借りて、取り付けていたのだ。
マシンの裏での作業中に体をひねった際ベルトから落とした携帯をヴァンに拾ってもらい、電話に出た。
<!-- "It's your phone," Van said. Felix extracted himself from the guts of the 486, which had refused to power up at all. He had cadged a spare power-supply from some guys who ran a spam operation and was trying to get it fitted. He let Van hand him the phone, which had fallen off his belt while he was twisting to get at the back of the machine. -->

「もしもし、ケリー？」
様子がおかしたかった。鼻をすする音が聞こえた。
2.0がバスルームで遊んでいるのか？
「ケリー？」
<!-- "Hey, Kel," he said. There was an odd, snuffling noise in the background. Static, maybe? 2.0 splashing in the bath? "Kelly?" -->

回線が切れた。
かけ直したが、呼出音もならないし、音声応答もない。
彼の携帯はタイムアウトし、NETWORK ERRORを表示していた。
<!-- The line went dead. He tried to call back, but didn't get anything—no ring nor voicemail. His phone finally timed out and said NETWORK ERROR. -->

「どしたってんだ。」彼は当惑して言った。
携帯電話をベルトに戻した。
きっと帰りがいつになるか聞きたかったのか、何か買って帰ってほしいてことだろう。
彼は留守電にメッセージを残してくれるだろうと思った。
<!-- "Dammit," he said, mildly. He clipped the phone to his belt. Kelly wanted to know when he was coming home, or wanted him to pick something up for the family. She'd leave voicemail. -->

もう一度、携帯が鳴ったときにはフィリックスは電源供給をテストしていた。
携帯をもぎとると、彼は言った。
「ケリー。どうしたんだ？」
彼は声に苛立ちがでないようにした。
彼は罪の意識を感じていた。
技術的に言えば、Ardent Financial LLCの責任から開放され、サーバもオンラインに復帰していた。
この３時間は、会社に請求しようと考えていたが、まったく個人的なことだった。
<!-- He was testing the power-supply when his phone rang again. He snatched it up and answered it. "Kelly, hey, what's up?" He worked to keep anything like irritation out of his voice. He felt guilty: technically speaking, he had discharged his obligations to Ardent Financial LLC once the Ardent servers were back online. The past three hours had been purely personal—even if he planned on billing them to the company. -->

咽び泣く声が聞こえた。
<!-- There was sobbing on the line. -->

「ケリー？」
フィリックスは顔から血の気が引き、指先の感覚が無くなるのがわかった。
<!-- "Kelly?" He felt the blood draining from his face and his toes were numb. -->

「フィリックス.....あの子が、あの子が...死んじゃう」
咽び泣きの中、なんとか聞き取ることができた。
<!-- "Felix," she said, barely comprehensible through the sobbing. "He's dead, oh Jesus, he's dead." -->

「ケリー? 誰のことなんだ？」
<!-- "Who? Who, Kelly?" -->

「ウィル..」
<!-- "Will," she said. -->

「ウィル? って...」彼はひざまづいた。
ウィリアムはフィリックスとケリーが出生届けに記入した名前だった。
フィリックスは声にならない叫びをあげた。
<!-- Will? he thought. Who the fuck is -- He dropped to his knees. William was the name they'd written on the birth certificate, though they'd called him 2.0 all along. Felix made an anguished sound, like a sick bark. -->

「わたしも体がおかしいわ。立ってられない。フィリックス、愛してるわ。」
<!-- "I'm sick," she said, "I can't even stand anymore. Oh, Felix. I love you so much." -->

「ケリー？　どうしたんだ。」
<!-- "Kelly? What's going on?" -->

「みんな、みんな....テレビはもう2つの放送局しか映らないわ...外は「死霊のえじき」みたい...」
吐く音が聞こえた。
電話機が壊れかけているようだった。受話器を拭う音がエコーがかかって聞こえた。
<!-- "Everyone, everyone—" she said. "Only two channels left on the tube. Christ, Felix, it looks like dawn of the dead out the window—" He heard her retch. The phone started to break up, washing her puke-noises back like an echoplex. -->

「そこでじっとしてるんだ。ケリー」電話が切れる直前に彼は叫んだ。
911に電話したが通話ボタンを押すと同時にNETWORK ERRORが表示された。
<!-- "Stay there, Kelly," he shouted as the line died. He punched 911, but the phone went NETWORK ERROR again as soon as he hit SEND. -->

彼はMayor McCheeseをヴァンから奪い、486へ繋いだ。そしてコマンドラインからファイアーフォックスを起動して、Metro Policeのサイトを検索した。すぐにインターネットでのアクセスフォームを見つけた。フェリックスはこれまでこれほど混乱したことはなかった。彼はこれまで多くの問題を解決して来ていたし、解けない問題に熱狂していた。
<!-- He grabbed Mayor McCheese from Van and plugged it into the 486's network cable and launched Firefox off the command line and googled for the Metro Police site. Quickly, but not frantically, he searched for an online contact form. Felix didn't lose his head, ever. He solved problems and freaking out didn't solve problems. -->

フェリックスはアクセスフォームにバグレポートを書くようにケリーとの会話の詳細を書き込んだ。タイピングスピードは恐ろしく速く、記述は完璧だった。そして、送信ボタンを押した。
<!-- He located an online form and wrote out the details of his conversation with Kelly like he was filing a bug report, his fingers fast, his description complete, and then he hit SUBMIT. -->

ヴァンは肩越しに覗き込んでいた。「フィリックス...」
<!-- Van had read over his shoulder. "Felix—" he began. -->

「ちくしょー」フェリックスが叫んだ。彼はラックの床に座っており、ゆっくりと立ち上がった。ヴァンがノートを取り上げ、いくつかのニュースサイトを見てみたが、全てタイムアウトを起こした。言いようのないひどいことが起こっているようだった。強力なワームがネットワークに影響を及ぼしているのかもしれなかった。
<!-- "God," Felix said. He was sitting on the floor of the cage and he slowly pulled himself upright. Van took the laptop and tried some news sites, but they were all timing out. Impossible to say if it was because something terrible was happening or because the network was limping under the superworm. -->

「帰らなくちゃ」フェリックスが言った。
<!-- "I need to get home," Felix said. -->

「俺が送ってく。お前はとにかく奥さんに電話し続けろ。」ヴァンが答えた。
<!-- "I'll drive you," Van said. "You can keep calling your wife." -->

彼らはエレベータへ向かった。建物の数少ない窓の一つがそこにあった。分厚く、頑丈にできた窓だった。彼らはその窓を覗きながらエレベータが来るのを待った。水曜日にしては車は少なかった。警察車両が多かった。
<!-- They made their way to the elevators. One of the building's few windows was there, a thick, shielded porthole. They peered through it as they waited for the elevator. Not much traffic for a Wednesday. Where there more police cars than usual? -->

「ウソだろっ?」ヴァンが指さしながら言った。
<!-- "Oh my God—" Van pointed. -->

CNタワーの巨大な象牙のような建物が彼らの西側にぼんやり見えた。まるで砂に差した枝のように塔は傾いていた。そしてゆっくりと傾きつつあった。そのスピードは増し、北東の金融地区へ倒れた。数秒後、塔の先端部分が雪崩落ち、崩れた。ショックに打ちのめされた２人に、塔が倒壊した音が聞こえてきた。粉塵が舞い上がり、世界で最も高い建物がビルを次々と倒しながら雷よりも大きな音を轟かせた。
<!-- The CN Tower, a giant white-elephant needle of a building loomed to the east of them. It was askew, like a branch stuck in wet sand. Was it moving? It was. It was heeling over, slowly, but gaining speed, falling northeast toward the financial district. In a second, it slid over the tipping point and crashed down. They felt the shock, then heard it, the whole building rocking from the impact. A cloud of dust rose from the wreckage, and there was more thunder as the world's tallest freestanding structure crashed through building after building. -->

「放送センターが倒壊した。」ヴァンが言った。CBCの放送塔はスローモーションで崩れていった。逃げまどう人々は落ちてくる石材につぶされていた。窓から見える映像はまるでbitorrentからダウンロードできる良くできたCGのようだった。
<!-- "The Broadcast Centre's coming down," Van said. It was—the CBC's towering building was collapsing in slow motion. People ran every way, were crushed by falling masonry. Seen through the port-hole, it was like watching a neat CGI trick downloaded from a file-sharing site. -->

他のシスアド達もフィリックスとヴァンのもとに集まって、倒壊を見ようと押し合った。
<!-- Sysadmins were clustering around them now, jostling to see the destruction. -->

「何が起こったんだ？」
<!-- "What happened?" one of them asked. -->

「CNタワーが倒れたんだ。」フィリックスは自分の声が遠くに聞こえた。
<!-- "The CN Tower fell down," Felix said. He sounded far away in his own ears. -->

「ウィルスかも。」
<!-- "Was it the virus?" -->

「ワーム？　何で？」フィリックスは発言者を見た。彼は若いシスアドで、比較的背が低く、小太りでタイプ２といったところだった。
<!-- "The worm? What?" Felix focused on the guy, who was a young admin with just a little type-two flab around the middle. -->

「ワームじゃないよ。この街全体がウィルスのせいで隔離されてるってメールがあったんだよ。生物兵器だって。」彼はフィリックスに自分のブラックベリーを渡した。
<!-- "Not the worm," the guy said. "I got an email that the whole city's quarantined because of some virus. Bioweapon, they say." He handed Felix his Blackberry. -->

フィリックスは夢中でカナダ保健省から転送されてた予備レポートを読んだ。室内の全ての照明が落ちたのにも気がつかず、読み終えると、ブラックベリーをもとの持ち主へ返した。涙が瞳からこぼれ落ちた。
<!-- Felix was so engrossed in the report—purportedly forwarded from Health Canada—that he didn't even notice that all the lights had gone out. Then he did, and he pressed the Blackberry back into its owner's hand, and let out one small sob. -->

=== 第四 ===

少しすると発電機が起動した。シスアド達は非常階段へなだれ込んだ。フィリックスはヴァンの腕をつかむと、他のシスアド達と行くのを押しとどめ、言った。
<!-- The generators kicked in a minute later. Sysadmins stampeded for the stairs. Felix grabbed Van by the arm, pulled him back. -->

「ここにとどまるべきかもしれない。」
<!-- "Maybe we should wait this out in the cage," he said. -->

「ケリーはどうすんだよ。」
<!-- "What about Kelly?" Van said. -->

フィリックスは全てを投げ出しているような気がした。「ケ−ジの中に戻るんだ。ケ−ジは分子レベルのエアーフィルタが設置してある。」
<!-- Felix felt like he was going to throw up. "We should get into the cage, now." The cage had microparticulate air-filters. -->

フィリックスとヴァンは上の階の比較的大きなケ−ジの中へ入った。彼らは中に入り、扉を閉めた。背後でシューという音と共に、隔離されるのがわかった。
<!-- They ran upstairs to the big cage. Felix opened the door and then let it hiss shut behind him. -->

「でも、おまえ家に帰らないと...」
<!-- "Felix, you need to get home—" -->

「生物兵器だ。オーダーメードのスーパーバグ。ここなら生き延びることができる。ウィルスがフィルタを通さなければ。」
<!-- "It's a bioweapon," Felix said. "Superbug. We'll be OK in here, I think, so long as the filters hold out." -->

「え？」
<!-- "What?" -->

「IRCへアクセスしよう。」フィリックスは言った。
<!-- "Get on IRC," he said. -->

ヴァンはMayor McCheese、フィリックスはSmurfetteでIRCへアクセスした。チャットのチャンネルはスキップして、ある有名なハンドルを探した。
<!-- They did. Van had Mayor McCheese and Felix used Smurfette. They skipped around the chat channels until they found one with some familiar handles. -->

> ペンタゴン消失/ホワイトハウスも同じく
<!-- > pentagons gone/white house too -->

> サンディエゴではお隣りさんが血反吐を吐いてる。
<!-- > MY NEIGHBORS BARFING BLOOD OFF HIS BALCONY IN SAN DIEGO -->

> 誰かがthe Gherkinをノックしてる。銀行員達がCityからネズミみたいに逃げ出してる。
<!-- > Someone knocked over the Gherkin. Bankers are fleeing the City like rats. -->

> 銀座が火事って聞いた。
<!-- > I heard that the Ginza's on fire -->

フィリックスは次のように入力した。
「トロントにいる。みんながCNタワーが倒壊したのを目撃した。生物兵器の噂が流れてる。発症が異常に早い。」
<!-- Felix typed: I'm in Toronto. We just saw the CN Tower fall. I've heard reports of bioweapons, something very fast. -->

内容を読むとヴァンが言った。
「フィリックス。発症は自分の目でみたわけじゃないだろ。３日前からウィルスに晒された可能性だってある。」
<!-- Van read this and said, "You don't know how fast it is, Felix. Maybe we were all exposed three days ago." -->

フィリックスは目を閉じて言った。
「もし、ウィルスに晒されて感染しているなら、なんらかの症状があらわれてるよ。」
<!-- Felix closed his eyes. "If that were so we'd be feeling some symptoms, I think." -->

> 
> Looks like an EMP took out Hong Kong and maybe Paris—realtime sat footage shows them completely dark, and all netblocks there aren't routing

> トロントにいる人?
<!-- > You're in Toronto? -->

あまり見慣れたハンドル名ではなかった。
<!-- It was an unfamiliar handle. -->

> ああ。フロント・ストリートだ。
<!-- > Yes—on Front Street -->

> 僕の妹がトロント大学なんだけど、連絡とれないんだ。連絡とれるかな？
<!-- > my sisters at UofT and i cnt reach her—can you call her? -->

> 電話は今通じない。
<!-- > No phone service -->

フィリックスはタイプすると「NETWORK PROBLEMS」の表示を見た。
<!-- Felix typed, staring at NETWORK PROBLEMS. -->

「今、思い出したんだけど、Mayor McCheeseってホストでソフトフォン入ってんだけど...」ヴァンはそう言うと、VOIPソフトを起動した。
<!-- "I have a soft phone on Mayor McCheese," Van said, launching his voice-over-IP app. "I just remembered." -->

フィリックスはヴァンからノートPCを借りて、自宅の電話番号にダイアルした。一度呼出し音がなり、無音。そして、イタリア映画に出てくる救急車のような耳障りな音が鳴りだした。
<!-- Felix took the laptop from him and punched in his home number. It rang once, then there was a flat, blatting sound like an ambulance siren in an Italian movie. -->

> 電話は通じない。
<!-- > No phone service -->

フィリックスはもう一度ダイアルした。
<!-- Felix typed again. -->

彼はヴァンを見上げ、彼の痩せた肩が震えるのを見た。ヴァンが言った。

「どうなってんだ。このまま世界が終わるってーのか！」
<!-- He looked up at Van, and saw that his skinny shoulders were shaking. Van said, "Holy motherfucking shit. The world is ending." -->

=== 第五 ===
およそ一時間後、フィリックスはIRCからなんとか抜け出た。アトランタは火に包まれ、マンハッタンはリンカーンセンターのウェブカメラで見たところ、高温の放射能でメチャクチャだった。イスラム過激派のしわざだと噂が出たが、メッカが煙に包まれ、サウジの王族が王宮から退避したと聞くと、次第におさまっていった。
<!-- Felix pried himself off of IRC an hour later. Atlanta had burned. Manhattan was hot—radioactive enough to screw up the webcams looking out over Lincoln Plaza. Everyone blamed Islam until it became clear that Mecca was a smoking pit and the Saudi Royals had been hanged before their palaces. -->

フィリックスの腕は震え、ヴァンはケ−ジの一番遠い角のほうで泣いていた。
フィリックスは何度も家や警察に電話していたが、ここ２０分間つながることはなかった。
<!-- His hands were shaking, and Van was quietly weeping in the far corner of the cage. He tried calling home again, and then the police. It didn't work any better than it had the last 20 times. -->

彼は階下の彼のマシンにsshでログインし、メールをチェックした。スパム、スパム。スパム。スパムメールの山だった。そして大量の自動生成されたメール。Ardentのケ−ジのIDS(侵入検知システム)からの緊急メッセージだった。
<!-- He sshed into his box downstairs and grabbed his mail. Spam, spam, spam. More spam. Automated messages. There—an urgent message from the intrusion detection system in the Ardent cage. -->

IDSからの緊急のメールを開いて読んだ。ルータに対する強引な探査が繰り返しおこなわれていた。ワームのシグニチャーには一致していなかった。発信元に対してtracerouteを実行し、彼がいる同じ建物の1階下の階のマシンからおこなわれているのがわかった。
<!-- He opened it and read quickly. Someone was crudely, repeatedly probing his routers. It didn't match a worm's signature, either. He followed the traceroute and discovered that the attack had originated in the same building as him, a system in a cage one floor below. -->

彼は攻撃しているマシンいポートスキャンをかけ、1337ポートが開かれており、1337はハッカーの文字変換の慣習から"leet"あるいは"elite"の変換コードだった。このポートはワームが出入りするのに使われているようだった。フィリックスは1337ポートを空けたままにしているバグを探すためにググって、侵入されたサーバのフィンガープリントが原因でダウンがおきているネットワークを隔離し、最後に正常に戻した。
<!-- He had procedures for this. He portscanned his attacker and found that port 1337 was open—1337 was "leet" or "elite" in hacker number/letter substitution code. That was the kind of port that a worm left open to slither in and out of. He googled known sploits that left a listener on port 1337, narrowed this down based on the fingerprinted operating system of the compromised server, and then he had it. -->

ワームは古くさいものだった。数年前に配布されているパッチを適用しておけば感染するようなものではなかった。No mind. 彼もクライアントを管理しており、そのマシンに自分用のrootアカウントを作成するために使っていた。彼はそのマシンにログインすると、ファイルシステムをチェックした。
<!-- It was an ancient worm, one that every box should have been patched against years before. No mind. He had the client for it, and he used it to create a root account for himself on the box, which he then logged into, and took a look around. -->

ログインしているのは彼だけではなかった。scaredyというユーザがログインしていて、フィリックスはscaredyがどんなプロセスを実行しているのかプロセスモニターでチェックした。そしてscaredyは数百のプロセスを展開して、彼のマシンを含むその他多くのマシンへ探査をかけているを確認した。
<!-- There was one other user logged in, "scaredy," and he checked the proccess monitor and saw that scaredy had spawned all the hundreds of processes that were probing him and plenty of other boxen. -->

彼はチャットを開いた。
<!-- He opened a chat: -->

> 俺のサーバを探査するのはやめろ。
<!-- > Stop probing my server -->

彼は怒号か謝罪、拒否の反応を待ったが、返ってきた反応は違った。
<!-- He expected bluster, guilt, denial. He was surprised. -->

> フロント・ストリートのデータセンターにいるの？
<!-- > Are you in the Front Street data-center? -->

> ああ。
<!-- > Yes -->

> よかった。僕が最後の生き残りだと思ってたよ。僕は4階にいる。生物兵器での攻撃が外では行われてるみたいだ。僕はクリーンルームを出たくない。
<!-- > Christ I thought I was the last one alive. I'm on the fourth floor. I think there's a bioweapon attack outside. I don't want to leave the clean room. -->

フィリックスは音を立てて息を吐き出した。
<!-- Felix whooshed out a breath. -->

> 君は僕にトレースバックしてほしくってプローブしてたのか？
<!-- > You were probing me to get me to trace back to you? -->

> ああ。
<!-- > Yeah -->

> なるほどね。
<!-- > That was smart -->

賢い奴だ。
<!-- Clever bastard. -->

> 僕はもう一人と一緒に6階にいる。
<!-- > I'm on the sixth floor, I've got one more with me. -->

> 何かわかったことあるかい？
<!-- > What do you know? -->

フィリックスはIRCのログを添付して、相手が概要を理解するのを待った。ヴァンが立ち上がって急いで近づいてきた。彼の目はガラス玉のようだった。
<!-- Felix pasted in the IRC log and waited while the other guy digested it. Van stood up and paced. His eyes were glazed over. -->

「ヴァン？　おい？」
<!-- "Van? Pal?" -->
 
「しょんべんしたいんだ。」ヴァンが答えた。
<!-- "I have to pee," he said. -->

「扉は開けられない。ごみ箱にあるMountain Dewの空びんを使えよ。」
<!-- "No opening the door," Felix said. "I saw an empty Mountain Dew bottle in the trash there." -->

「そうする」ヴァンは答えると、ゾンビ見たいにごみ箱のほうに向かっていき、空びんを引出すと、フィリックスに背を向けた。
<!-- "Right," Van said. He walked like a zombie to the trash can and pulled out the empty magnum. He turned his back. -->

> 僕はフィリックス。
<!-- > I'm Felix -->

> ウィル。
<!-- > Will -->

一瞬、2.0のことが頭によぎり、フィリックスは胃が裏返るのを感じた。
<!-- Felix's stomach did a slow somersault as he thought about 2.0. -->

「フィリックス、俺は外にでなくちゃならないと思ってるんだ。」ヴァンはそう言うと、エアーロックがかかった扉のほうへ歩きだした。フィリックスは慌てて、キーボードを落とし、ヴァンの後に続いた。なんとかフィリックスは扉に到達する前にヴァンを取り抑えることができた。
<!-- "Felix, I think I need to go outside," Van said. He was moving toward the airlock door. Felix dropped his keyboard and struggled to his feet and ran headlong to Van, tackling him before he reached the door. -->

「ヴァン。俺を見ろ。ヴァン。」ヴァンの目は霞がかかり、焦点があっていなかった。
<!-- "Van," he said, looking into his friend's glazed, unfocused eyes. "Look at me, Van." -->

「行かなくちゃならないんだ。」ヴァンがうつろに言った。「帰って猫に餌をやらなきゃ。」
<!-- "I need to go," Van said. "I need to get home and feed the cats." -->

「外は即効性の強い致死性のヤバいもんが蔓延してる。風で霧散するか、したかもしれないけど、手段がなくなるまで、ここにとどまるしかないんだ。座れ。座るんだ、ヴァン。」
<!-- "There's something out there, something fast-acting and lethal. Maybe it will blow away with the wind. Maybe it's already gone. But we're going to sit here until we know for sure or until we have no choice. Sit down, Van. Sit." -->

「寒いんだ。フィリックス」
<!-- "I'm cold, Felix." -->

確かに室内の温度は低かった。フィリックスの腕には鳥肌が立ち、足は氷のようになっていた。
<!-- It was freezing. Felix's arms were broken out in gooseflesh and his feet felt like blocks of ice. -->

「サーバにもたれて座るんだ。排気口近くがいい。少しは温かいはずだ。」彼もラックにもたれ身をかがめた。
<!-- "Sit against the servers, by the vents. Get the exhaust heat." He found a rack and nestled up against it. -->

> そこにいるか？
<!-- > Are you there? -->

> まだいる。考えをまとめてるところだ。
<!-- > Still here—sorting out some logistics -->

> どのぐらいで外に出られると思う？
<!-- > How long until we can go out? -->

> わからない。
<!-- > I have no idea -->

その後、長い間キーを打ち込むものはなかった。
<!-- No one typed anything for quite some time then. -->

=== 第六 ===

フィリックスはMountain Dewのボトルを2度使っていた。ヴァンももう１度。フィリックスはケリーにもう一度ダイアルしていた。Metro Policeのサイトもダウンしたままだった。
<!-- Felix had to use the Mountain Dew bottle twice. Then Van used it again. Felix tried calling Kelly again. The Metro Police site was down. -->

フィリックスはサーバによりかかり、ひざを抱え、赤んぼうのように泣いた。
<!-- Finally, he slid back against the servers and wrapped his arms around his knees and wept like a baby. -->

少し後、ヴァンもフィリックスの側に座り、フィリックスの肩に腕を回し抱きしめた。
<!-- After a minute, Van came over and sat beside him, with his arm around Felix's shoulder. -->

「みんな死んだんだ。」フィリックスが言った。「ケリー、俺の息子。俺の家族はもういないんだ。」
<!-- "They're dead, Van," Felix said. "Kelly and my s-- son. My family is gone." -->

「まだ、わからないよ。」ヴァンが答えた。
<!-- "You don't know for sure," Van said. -->

「もう十分わかってるさ、ちくしょー。おしまいだ。そうだろう？」
<!-- "I'm sure enough," Felix said. "Christ, it's all over, isn't it?" -->

「あと数時間ここで耐えて、外に出よう。すぐ普段通りの生活に戻れるさ。災害本部がなんとかするって。軍の出動要請もあるだろう。それで万事OKさ。」
<!-- "We'll gut it out a few more hours and then head out. Things should be getting back to normal soon. The fire department will fix it. They'll mobilize the Army. It'll be OK." -->

フィリックスは肋を痛めていた。彼は2.0が生まれてから、泣いたことはなかった。抱えたひざをより一層抱き抱えた。
<!-- Felix's ribs hurt. He hadn't cried since—Since 2.0 was born. He hugged his knees harder. -->

そのとき、エアロックが開いた。
<!-- Then the doors opened. -->

シスアド２人が目を大きく見開いて入ってきた。一人は"TALK NERDY TO ME"(オタクっぽく話しかけてね)のTシャツを着て、もう一人はElectronic Frontiers Canadaのポロシャツを着ていた。
<!-- The two sysadmins who entered were wild-eyed. One had a tee that said TALK NERDY TO ME and the other one was wearing an Electronic Frontiers Canada shirt. -->

TALK NERDYは言った。「来てくれ。俺たちは最上階で集まってるんだ。階段で移動してくれ。」
<!-- "Come on," TALK NERDY said. "We're all getting together on the top floor. Take the stairs." -->

フィリックスは彼が息を止めていたのがわかった。
<!-- Felix found he was holding his breath. -->

「このビル内に感染者が一人でもいれば、みんな感染してしまう。さあ、行ってくれ。最上階で合おう。」TALK NERDYが言った。
<!-- "If there's a bioagent in the building, we're all infected," TALK NERDY said. "Just go, we'll meet you there." -->

「6階にもう一人いる。」フィリックスは立上りながら言った。(4階の間違い？)
<!-- "There's one on the sixth floor," Felix said, as he climbed to his feet. -->

「ウィルだろ。わかってる。彼も最上階にいる。」
<!-- "Will, yeah, we got him. He's up there." -->

TALK NERDYは基幹ルータのプラグを抜いたBastard Operators >From Hellの一人だった。フィリックスとヴァンは階段をゆっくりと登っていった。足音が誰もいないホールに木霊した。冷蔵庫のようなケ−ジの中の後では、階段ホールはサウナのようだった。
<!-- TALK NERDY was one of the Bastard Operators >From Hell who'd unplugged the big routers. Felix and Van climbed the stairs slowly, their steps echoing in the deserted shaft. After the frigid air of the cage, the stairwell felt like a sauna. -->

最上階にはカフェテリアが備えつけられており、トイレもあり、コーヒーと簡単な食べ物の自動販売機もあった。トイレと自動販売機にはシスアドの行列ができていた。誰もお互いの目を見合わそうとはしなかった。フィリックスはウィルを探しながら、自動販売機の列に加わった。
<!-- There was a cafeteria on the top floor, with working toilets, water and coffee and vending machine food. There was an uneasy queue of sysadmins before each. No one met anyone's eye. Felix wondered which one was Will and then he joined the vending machine queue. -->

彼はなんとか売り切れ前に数個のスニッカーズとヴァニラコーヒーの特大カップを買うことができた。ヴァンのほうは席を取っていた。購入した食糧をヴァンにあずけてフィリックスはトイレの列に並んだ。フィリックスは持っていたスニッカーズ１つを「持っててくれ」と言いながら、ヴァンに放り投げた。
<!-- He got a couple more energy bars and a gigantic cup of vanilla coffee before running out of change. Van had scored them some table space and Felix set the stuff down before him and got in the toilet line. "Just save some for me," he said, tossing an energy bar in front of Van. -->

フィリックスとヴァンが落ち着いたころには、すべての避難は完了し、みんな適度に胃に食糧を詰め込んだところだった。TALK NERDYとその仲間が戻ってきた。彼らが食糧受渡しエリアのレジの現金をかっさらい、TALK NERDYがそれを収めるころには、会話は途絶え、沈黙が拡がっていった。
<!-- By the time they were all settled in, thoroughly evacuated, and eating, TALK NERDY and his friend had returned again. They cleared off the cash-register at the end of the food-prep area and TALK NERDY got up on it. Slowly the conversation died down. -->

「私の名前はUri Popovich、でこっちがDiego Rosenbaum。みんな集まってくれてありがとう。わかってることを整理しよう。ビルの電気はここ３時間、発電機でまかなわれてる。視認した限りでは、トロント中心部で電気が通ってるのはここだけだ。電気はあと３日間はもたさなければならないと思う。外では未知の生物兵器が散布され、致死性であり、発症も2、3時間、呼吸するだけで感染する危険がある。従って、これから午前5時まで決して外部への窓は開けないでほしい。私の許可があるまで控えてくれ。」
<!-- "I'm Uri Popovich, this is Diego Rosenbaum. Thank you all for coming up here. Here's what we know for sure: the building's been on generators for three hours now. Visual observation indicates that we're the only building in central Toronto with working power—which should hold out for three more days. There is a bioagent of unknown origin loose beyond our doors. It kills quickly, within hours, and it is aerosolized. You get it from breathing bad air. No one has opened any of the exterior doors to this building since five this morning. No one will open the doors until I give the go-ahead. -->

「世界の主要都市への攻撃は混乱の中での緊急の反応を引き起こした。攻撃は多岐にわたり、電子的、生化学的なもの。あるいは核、通常の爆発物に及び、非常に広範囲で影響を及ぼしている。私はセキュリティエンジニアだが、この種の一連の攻撃は通常日和見主義と見ることができる。グループBが橋を爆破し、グループAが核兵器を使用する。この場合、グループAの攻撃から対象者は逃げることができなくなり、合理的だ。ソウルにおけるオウム真理教のガス散布は地下鉄でおこなわれ、東海岸時間の2時頃、確認できた限りでは最初のものだ。したがって、so it may have been the Archduke that broke the camel's back.これは確実な線で、オウム真理教はこの事件には関わっていない。彼らにはサイバーテロの前歴、また、これほど広範囲にわたる目標を同時に攻撃するのに必要な組織も、技術も確認されていないからだ。基本的にかれらはこんなにスマートじゃない。」
<!-- "Attacks on major cities all over the world have left emergency responders in chaos. The attacks are electronic, biological, nuclear and conventional explosives, and they are very widespread. I'm a security engineer, and where I come from, attacks in this kind of cluster are usually viewed as opportunistic: group B blows up a bridge because everyone is off taking care of group A's dirty nuke event. It's smart. An Aum Shin Rikyo cell in Seoul gassed the subways there about 2AM Eastern—that's the earliest event we can locate, so it may have been the Archduke that broke the camel's back. We're pretty sure that Aum Shin Rikyo couldn't be behind this kind of mayhem: they have no history of infowar and have never shown the kind of organizational acumen necessary to take out so many targets at once. Basically, they're not smart enough. -->

「われわれは先の見えない未来に向けてここで待機している。少なくとも、生物兵器が離散したのを確認するまでは。とにかくネットワークを維持するためにラックに張りつく人間が必要だ。この情報インフラは生命線だ。したがって、サーバの5割は稼働させる必要がある。国家的危機におけるわれわれの責任は倍増する。」
<!-- "We're holing up here for the foreseeable future, at least until the bioweapon has been identified and dispersed. We're going to staff the racks and keep the networks up. This is critical infrastructure, and it's our job to make sure it's got five nines of uptime. In times of national emergency, our responsibility to do that doubles." -->

一人のシスアドが手を挙げた。彼は緑色のIncredible Hulk ringTシャツを着て悠然としており、集まったシスアドの中でも最も若かった。
<!-- One sysadmin put up his hand. He was very daring in a green Incredible Hulk ring-tee, and he was at the young end of the scale. -->

「誰が死んで、あんたを王様にしたの？」
<!-- "Who died and made you king?" -->

「わたしはここのメインセキュリティーシステムを管理している。ケージの全ての鍵、今現在ロックされている外部への扉のパスワードなんかだ。成り行き上、わたしがこの最上階にみんなを集めて、このミーティングを開いた。わたしは誰がこの役割を誰がやろうと気にかけてはいない。些細なことだ。しかし、だれかがこの役割を引き受けなければならないと思う。」
<!-- "I have controls for the main security system, keys to every cage, and passcodes for the exterior doors—they're all locked now, by the way. I'm the one who got everyone up here first and called the meeting. I don't care if someone else wants this job, it's a shitty one. But someone needs to have this job." -->

「正論だね。」若いシスアドが言った。
「でも僕もあなたと同じことならできるよ。僕の名前はウィル・サイロ。」
<!-- "You're right," the kid said. "And I can do it every bit as well as you. My name's Will Sario." -->

Popovichは彼を見下ろした。

「それじゃ、君がわたしの話し終わるのを待ってくれたら、君に役割を引き受けてもらうよ。」
<!-- Popovich looked down his nose at the kid. "Well, if you'll let me finish talking, maybe I'll hand things over to you when I'm done." -->

「すべて終わったらね。」

ウィル・サイロは背を向けて窓の方へ歩いていった。彼はわざと視線を逸していた。フィリックスの視線はウィルに引きつけられた。そして、街の中心部から黒いガソリンの煙が煙が立ちのぼっているのを見た。
<!-- "Finish, by all means." Sario turned his back on him and walked to the window. He stared out of it intensely. Felix's gaze was drawn to it, and he saw that there were several oily smoke plumes rising up from the city. -->

Popovichは気がそがれたようだった。

「さて、われわれはどうすべきだろう。」

彼は言った。
<!-- Popovich's momentum was broken. "So that's what we're going to do," he said. -->

若いシスアドは沈黙をしばらく眺め、言った。

「あれ、もうぼくの番かな?」
<!-- The kid looked around after a stretched moment of silence. "Oh, is it my turn now?" -->

悪意のないくすくす笑いが起こった。
<!-- There was a round of good-natured chuckling. -->

「ぼくが思うに、世界はもう終わりなんだよ。必要なインフラには用意周到な攻撃がおこなわれてる。これほど巧妙に攻撃をおこなう方法は一つしかない。インターネットだ。攻撃が日和見主義的だって理論をとるにしても、ぼくらはどうやって数分で日和見主義的攻撃がおこなわれた考えなきゃならない。それがインターネットってわけ。」
<!-- "Here's what I think: the world is going to shit. There are coordinated attacks on every critical piece of infrastructure. There's only one way that those attacks could be so well coordinated: via the Internet. Even if you buy the thesis that the attacks are all opportunistic, we need to ask how an opportunistic attack could be organized in minutes: the Internet." -->

「そうすると君はインターネットをシャットダウンすべきだって言うのかい？」Popovichがかすかに笑いながら言いかけたが、ウィル・サイロが何も言わないとわかると黙った。
<!-- "So you think we should shut down the Internet?" Popovich laughed a little, but stopped when Sario said nothing. -->

「ぼくらは昨夜インターネットが死にかけた攻撃を見たろう。基幹ルータにちょっとしたDoS攻撃、ちょっとしたDNSなんとかで牧師の娘さんみたいに落っこっちゃうんだよ。警察や軍は技術恐怖症の根性なしで、結局ほとんどインターネットに依存してない。ぼくらがインターネットを落としたら、部分的にだけど攻撃者を不利にすることができる。ほっといても守備が大変なだけだもんね。それに時間が経てば、やり直すことができるし。」
<!-- "We saw an attack last night that nearly killed the Internet. A little DoS on the critical routers, a little DNS-foo, and down it goes like a preacher's daughter. Cops and the military are a bunch of technophobic lusers, they hardly rely on the net at all. If we take the Internet down, we'll disproportionately disadvantage the attackers, while only inconveniencing the defenders. When the time comes, we can rebuild it." -->

「君は正気なのか？」

ポポビッチは言った。彼の顎は文字どおり開いたままだ。
<!-- "You're shitting me," Popovich said. His jaw literally hung open. -->

「論理的に考えなよ。まったく大事なときにこそ論理的に考えることが必要なのに。こういうのって問題だよね。論理的に考えなきゃ。」
<!-- "It's logical," Sario said. "Lots of people don't like coping with logic when it dictates hard decisions. That's a problem with people, not logic." -->

そこここでざわめきが持ちあがり、怒号に変わった。
<!-- There was a buzz of conversation that quickly turned into a roar. -->

「静かに!」

ポポビッチが大声で言った。騒ぎは1ワットまでおさまった。ポポビッチはもう一度叫ぶと、床を踏みならした。ようやく見かけ上は落ち着いたようだった。

「１度に１人ずつだ。」

彼は言った。彼は顔を紅潮させ、ポケットに手を突っ込んだ。
<!-- "Shut UP!" Popovich hollered. The conversation dimmed by one Watt. Popovich yelled again, stamping his foot on the countertop. Finally there was a semblance of order. "One at a time," he said. He was flushed red, his hands in his pockets. -->

あるシスアドは残ることを、また別のものは出ていくことを。
彼らはケージの中で隠れるべきだった。
今あるものの目録をつくり、四つに分けられたグループの各リーダーの割り当てをきめるべきこと。
外へ出て警察か病院のボランティアを見つけるべきこと。
正面入口のセキュリティを確保する要員を決めるべきこと。
<!-- One sysadmin was for staying. Another for going. They should hide in the cages. They should inventory their supplies and appoint a quartermaster. They should go outside and find the police, or volunteer at hospitals. They should appoint defenders to keep the front door secure. -->

フィリックスは自分が手をあげていることに驚いた。ポポビッチが発言に許可を与えた。
<!-- Felix found to his surprise that he had his hand in the air. Popovich called on him. -->

「僕の名前はフェリックス・トレモント。」彼はそう言うと、テーブルの上に立ち上がってPDAを取り出した。

「これからみんなに読むから聴いてほしい。」
<!-- "My name is Felix Tremont," he said, getting up on one of the tables, drawing out his PDA. "I want to read you something. -->

「工業世界の巨大なくたびれた鉄の体の政府のみなさん。わたしは新しい精神の家、サイバースペースから来ました。未来の代表として、わたしたちは過去のものとしてのあなた方に干渉してほしくない。あなた方はわたしたちに歓迎されてはいない。あなた方はわたしたちのあつまる場所を統治することはできない。」
<!-- "'Governments of the Industrial World, you weary giants of flesh and steel, I come from Cyberspace, the new home of Mind. On behalf of the future, I ask you of the past to leave us alone. You are not welcome among us. You have no sovereignty where we gather. -->

「わたしたちには選任された統治体制はなく、これからも持つことはない。したがって、個人での自由な発言以上の権限であなた方に発言することはできないけれども、わたしは宣言する。わたしたちがつくった地球規模の公共スペースは本来、あなた方がわたしたちに課そうとしている統治体制から独立している。あなた方にはわたしたちを支配する倫理的権利も、わたしたちへ強制するわたしたちが恐れるような手段もない。」
<!-- "'We have no elected government, nor are we likely to have one, so I address you with no greater authority than that with which liberty itself always speaks. I declare the global social space we are building to be naturally independent of the tyrannies you seek to impose on us. You have no moral right to rule us nor do you possess any methods of enforcement we have true reason to fear. -->

「政府は本来、その権力を統治されるものの合意から得ている。あなた方はわたしたちのその要請も合意も持ってはいない。わたしたちはあなた方を招待しない。あなた方はわたしたちを知らないし、わたしたちの世界を知らない。サイバースペースはあなた方国境の内側にはない。サイバースペースは公共事業のようにあなた方がつくったとは思わないでほしい。あなた方にはつくることはできない。サイバースペースは自然の営みであり、わたしたちの集合的活動により成長する。」
<!-- "'Governments derive their just powers from the consent of the governed. You have neither solicited nor received ours. We did not invite you. You do not know us, nor do you know our world. Cyberspace does not lie within your borders. Do not think that you can build it, as though it were a public construction project. You cannot. It is an act of nature and it grows itself through our collective actions.' -->

「サイバースペース独立宣言からだ。１２年前に書かれたものだ。ぼくはいままで生きてきて読んだものの中で最も美しいものの一つだと思ってた。ぼくは、ぼくの子供がサイバースペースが自由で、その自由が実際の世界にも影響を及ぼし、肉体をもった世界もより自由になっている世界で大きくなってほしかった。」
<!-- "That's from the Declaration of Independence of Cyberspace. It was written 12 years ago. I thought it was one of the most beautiful things I'd ever read. I wanted my kid to grow up in a world where cyberspace was free—and where that freedom infected the real world, so meatspace got freer too." -->

彼は大きく息を吸い込むと手の甲で両目をこすった。ヴァンがぎこちなく彼の靴に手を触れた。
<!-- He swallowed hard and scrubbed at his eyes with the back of his hand. Van awkwardly patted him on the shoe. -->

<!-- ぼくのうつくしい息子、ぼくのうつくしい妻は今日死んだ。何百人もいっしょに。街の中心部は文字どおり、火につつまれてる。街全体が地図から消えた。」
<!-- "My beautiful son and my beautiful wife died today. Millions more, too. The city is literally in flames. Whole cities have disappeared from the map." -->

彼は咽び泣きを咳とばし、もう一度大きく息を吸った。
<!-- He coughed up a sob and swallowed it again. -->

「世界中でぼくらみたいな人々がこの建物みたいに集まってる。みんな昨夜のワームのディザスター攻撃を修復しようとした。ぼくらには独立した力、たべもの、水がある。」
<!-- "All around the world, people like us are gathered in buildings like this. They were trying to recover from last night's worm when disaster struck. We have independent power. Food. Water. -->

「ぼくらにはネットワークがある。悪意ある人が巧妙につかい、善意の人はその使いかたをわからなかったけれど。」
<!-- "We have the network, that the bad guys use so well and that the good guys have never figured out. -->

「ぼくらにはネットワークを気に掛け心配する共通した自由の愛がある。ぼくらには今まで世界が見たこともないような最も重要な組織、政府の責任がある。ぼくらは今や世界のなかで一つの政府に近いものだ。ジューネヴはクレーター。ニューヨークのイーストリバーは火災で国連は避難している。」
<!-- "We have a shared love of liberty that comes from caring about and caring for the network. We are in charge of the most important organizational and governmental tool the world has ever seen. We are the closest thing to a government the world has right now. Geneva is a crater. The East River is on fire and the UN is evacuated. -->

「この嵐の中で分散サイバースペース共和国に基本的被害はない。ぼくらは不死で怪物的なすばらしい機械、よりよい世界を再構築する可能性を秘めたものの守護者だ。」
<!-- "The Distributed Republic of Cyberspace weathered this storm basically unscathed. We are the custodians of a deathless, monstrous, wonderful machine, one with the potential to rebuild a better world. -->

「ぼくはこの仕事がなにごとにも替え難い。」
<!-- "I have nothing to live for but that." -->

ヴァンは泣いていた。彼だけではなかった。みんな彼を拍手で称賛することはなかったが、わかっていた。みんなが完全な賛嘆の沈黙で迎え１分近くに及んだ。
<!-- There were tears in Van's eyes. He wasn't the only one. They didn't applaud him, but they did one better. They maintained respectful, total silence for seconds that stretched to a minute. -->

あざけり無く、ポポビッチが言った。
「どうやって実行に移すべきか？」
<!-- "How do we do it?" Popovich said, without a trace of sarcasm. -->

=== 第七 ===
ニュースグループはすぐにいっぱいになっていた。新たに公開していたnews.admin.net-abuse.emailグループには、spamと格闘するシスアドがたむろしていた。そこでは、猛攻撃に直面して強固な仲間意識が形成されていた。
<!-- The newsgroups were filling up fast. They'd announced them in news.admin.net-abuse.email, where all the spamfighters hung out, and where there was a tight culture of camaraderie in the face of full-out attack. -->

新しいグループはalt.november5-disaster.recoveryで.recovery.goverance、.recovery.finance、.recovery.logistic、.recovery.defenseの階層にぶら下がっていた。
Bless the wooly alt. hierarchy and all those who sail in her.
<!-- The new group was alt.november5-disaster.recovery, with .recovery.goverance, .recovery.finance, .recovery.logistics and .recovery.defense hanging off of it. Bless the wooly alt. hierarchy and all those who sail in her. -->

シスアド達がどこからともなくあらわれた。Googleの分散サーバ群はオンラインだった。強烈なクイーン・コングをボスとしてローラーブレードを履いた手下に巨大なデータセンター内のSWAPアウトして死んでいるサーバのリブート・スイッチを押させていた。the PresidioのInternet Archiveはオフラインだったが、アムステルダムのミラーサイトは生きており、DNSでリダイレクトされ通常通り利用できた。Amazonは落ちていた。Paypalは稼働。BloggerとTypepad、Livejournalはすべて稼働していた。そして電子的温かさを求めて恐怖に打ちのめされた生存者が集まり、数百の投稿でいっぱいだった。
<!-- The sysadmins came out of the woodwork. The Googleplex was online, with the stalwart Queen Kong bossing a gang of rollerbladed grunts who wheeled through the gigantic data-center swapping out dead boxen and hitting reboot switches. The Internet Archive was offline in the Presidio, but the mirror in Amsterdam was live and they'd redirected the DNS so that you'd hardly know the difference. Amazon was down. Paypal was up. Blogger, Typepad and Livejournal were all up, and filling with millions of posts from scared survivors huddling together for electronic warmth. -->

Flickrの写真画像のやりとりは大変なものだった。フェリックスは見るのをやめた。台所でウィルスで苦悶に身をヒエログリフのように歪ませた女性と赤ちゃんの写真を見てしまったからだ。彼女達はケリーや2.0に似ていなかったが、彼女達がそうなっていいはずはなかった。フェリックスは震えはじめ、止めることができなかった。
<!-- The Flickr photostreams were horrific. Felix had to unsubscribe from them after he caught a photo of a woman and a baby, dead in a kitchen, twisted into an agonized heiroglyph by the bioagent. They didn't look like Kelly and 2.0, but they didn't have to. He started shaking and couldn't stop.-->

Wikipediaは稼働していたが、負荷のために反応がにぶかった。スパムはなにごともなかったように届いており、ワームはネットワーク上に蔓延していた。
<!-- Wikipedia was up, but limping under load. The spam poured in as though nothing had changed. Worms roamed the network. -->

.recovery.logisticsはもっとも活発だった。
<!-- .recovery.logistics was where most of the action was. -->

> 地区ごとでニュースグループの投票システムを使えるね。
<!-- > We can use the newsgroup voting mechanism to hold regional 

> elections -->

フェリックスにはこのシステムが機能することがわかっていた。ユーズネットのニュースグループは20年間物理的な問題なく利用されてきていた。
<!-- Felix knew that this would work. Usenet newsgroup votes had been running for more than twenty years without a substantial hitch. -->

> まず地域の代表を選出し、それから代表者による首相を決める。
<!-- > We'll elect regional representatives and they'll pick a Prime

> Minister. -->

アメリカ人は大統領を主張していたが、フェリックスはあまりその主張が好きでなかった。あまりに党派主義的に思えたのだ。彼の未来はアメリカの未来ではなかった。アメリカの未来はホワイトハウスと共に消失したのだ。彼はアメリカよりも大きな入れ物を考えていた。
<!-- The Americans insisted on President, which Felix didn't like. Seemed too partisan. His future wouldn't be the American future. The American future had gone up with the White House. He was building a bigger tent than that. -->

フランステレコムからのフランスのシスアドもいた。EBUのデータセンターはジュネーブが攻撃で破壊された場合に備えたものだったが、フェリックスより英語がうまいゆがんだドイツ人でいっぱいだった。彼らはカナリア諸島の埠頭にいるBBCチームの生き残りとうまくやっていた。
<!-- There were French sysadmins online from France Telecom. The EBU's data-center had been spared in the attacks that hammered Geneva, and it was filled with wry Germans whose English was better than Felix's. They got on well with the remains of the BBC team in Canary Wharf. -->

.recovery.logisticsでは多様な英語が使われていた。フェリックスは彼の側で勢いをつけていた。
シスアドなかには避け難いばかげたフレームウォーに長年の経験を生かすものもいた。
また、有効な提案も上がっていた。
<!--
They spoke polyglot English in .recovery.logistics, and Felix had momentum on his side. Some of the admins were cooling out the inevitable stupid flamewars with the practice of long years. Some were chipping in useful suggestions.
-->

驚いたことに、フェリックスがイカレテルと思っているものはいないようだった。
<!-- 
Surprisingly few thought that Felix was off his rocker.
-->

> ぼくはできるだけ早く選挙をすべきだと思うんだ。最短で明日。
<!-- 
> I think we should hold elections as soon as possible. Tomorrow
-->

> 管理されていることに合意がなきゃ、ちゃんとまとまんないよ。
<!--
> at the latest. We can't rule justly without the consent of the
-->
<!--
> governed.
-->

数秒後、inboxに返信が届いた。
<!--
Within seconds the reply landed in his inbox.
-->

> ばかげたこと言わないでよ。合意済みの管理？

> わたしの考えてるのが間違ってるといいんだけど、あなたが管理されるべきと思ってる人は

> 今ごろ、みんな机の下で食べたものを吐いてるか、戦時中のシェルショックの症状みたいに

> ぼーとなって街なかをうろついてるわ。
<!-- 
> You can't be serious. Consent of the governed? Unless I miss my

> guess, most of the people you're proposing to govern are puking

> their guts out, hiding under their desks, or wandering

> shell-shocked through the city streets. When do THEY get a vote?
-->

クイーンコングは辛辣だ。フェリックスは彼女の発言は的を射ていると考えざるをえなかった。
シスアドに女性は少ない。そしてそのことはある種の本当の悲劇だった。
クイーンコングのような女性を無視するわけにはいかなかった。
彼は新たな管理組織において女性をどう位置付ければいいか見つけようと、ハッキングしていた。
それぞれの地域に女性と男性一人ずつ選任する。
<!--
Felix had to admit she had a point. Queen Kong was sharp. Not many woman sysadmins, and that was a genuine tragedy. Women like Queen Kong were too good to exclude from the field. He'd have to hack a solution to get women balanced out in his new government. Require each region to elect one woman and one man?
-->

彼はクイーンコングとキーボードでカタカタと激しく議論した。
選挙は次の日に決まった。
彼はそれを見届けるだろう。
<!-- 
He happily clattered into argument with her. The elections would be the next day; he'd see to it.
-->

=== 第八 ===
「サーバースペース総理大臣？ グローバル・データ・ネットワーク最高えらい人とかは？　なんか威厳がある感じでかっこよくきこえない？　総理よりいいと思うんだけど」

カフェテリアでのウィルの寝場所はフェリックスのとなりだった。もう片側にはヴァンがいる。
部屋はクソのような臭いがした。
少なくとも１日は風呂に入っていない25人のシスアドが同じ部屋につめこまれているのだ。
中には数日間風呂に入っていないものもいる。
<!--
"Prime Minister of Cyberspace? Why not call yourself the Grand Poobah of the Global Data Network? It's more dignified, sounds cooler and it'll get you just as far." Will had the sleeping spot next to him, up in the cafeteria, with Van on the other side. The room smelled like a dingleberry: twenty-five sysadmins who hadn't washed in at least a day all crammed into the same room. For some of them, it had been much, much longer than a day.
-->

「だまれよ。お前はインターネットをオフラインにしたかったんだろーが。」ヴァンが言った。
<!--
"Shut up, Will," Van said. "You wanted to try to knock the Internet offline."
-->

「訂正。ぼくはインターネットをオフラインにし・た・いんだ。現在形ね。」
<!--
"Correction: I want to knock the Internet offline. Present-tense"
-->

フェリックスは片目をかすかに開けた。とても疲れていた。まるでウェイト・リフティングをしたかのようだった。
<!--
Felix cracked one eye. He was so tired, it was like lifting weights.
-->

「いいかい。ウィル・サイロ君。君がぼくの考えに否定的なら自分の考えを押し進めればいい。ぼくの考えがばかばかしくって、ほかの誰かを推したてようしてる連中もたくさんいる。ぼくはそいつらを尊敬する。これは君の選択なんだ。ぶつくさ不平を言うことはメニューにはないんだよ。さあ、寝る時間だ。そうじゃなきゃ自分の案をポストしろよ。」
<!--
"Look, Sario—if you don't like my platform, put one of your own forward. There are plenty of people who think I'm full of shit and I respect them for that, since they're all running opposite me or backing someone who is. That's your choice. What's not on the menu is nagging and complaining. Bedtime now, or get up and post your platform."
-->

ウィルはゆっくりと体を起こすと、枕として使っていたジャケットを広げ、着込んだ。

「ばかなお二人さん、ぼくはここを出るよ。」
<!--
Sario sat up slowly, unrolling the jacket he had been using for a pillow and putting it on. "Screw you guys, I'm out of here."
-->

「ぜったいここを離れないと思ったんだけどな」

フェリックスはそう言うと寝返りを打った。眠れなかった。選挙について考えていた。
<!--
"I thought he'd never leave," Felix said and turned over, lying awake a long time, thinking about the election.
-->

ほかにも稼働しているものがいた。中にはシスアドでさえない者もいた。ワイオミの夏用別荘に避難していた合衆国上院議員で自家発電機と衛星電話を持っていたのだ。彼はどういうわけか正しくこのニュースグループを見つけて立候補したのだった。イタリアの無政府主義ハッカーは一晩中、怪しげな英語の長文で新世界での「政府」という政治的破産ついてポストして、このニュースグループを攻撃していた。フェリックスは彼らのネットワークIPを確認すると、彼らがトリノ近くの小さなInteraction Design instituteにいることを確認した。イタリアは壊滅的だったが、小さな町は生き残ったのだ。この無政府主義者達は反抗を選んだのだ。
<!--
There were other people in the running. Some of them weren't even sysadmins. A US Senator on retreat at his summer place in Wyoming had generator power and a satellite phone. Somehow he'd found the right newsgroup and thrown his hat into the ring. Some anarchist hackers in Italy strafed the group all night long, posting broken-English screeds about the political bankruptcy of "governance" in the new world. Felix looked at their netblock and determined that they were probably holed up in a small Interaction Design institute near Turin. Italy had been hit very bad, but out in the small town, this cell of anarchists had taken up residence.
-->

驚くべき数のマシンがインターネットをシャットダウンすることについてのニュースグループに参加していた。フェリックスはそれが果して可能なのか疑っていた。
しかし、彼はインターネットをシャットダウンすることが、復旧作業を終了させ、世界をも終了させるような衝撃だと感じていた。
なぜ？ すべてか指し示すもの。そのことは一連のディザスター、攻撃、日和見主義から破滅への一歩だと思えた。
テロリストはここを攻撃し、過剰な反応を起こした政府からのカウンター攻撃... すぐに世界のthey'd made short work of the world.
<!--
A surprising number were running on a platform of shutting down the Internet. Felix had his doubts about whether this was even possible, but he thought he understood the impulse to finish the work and the world. Why not? From every indication, it seemed that the work to date had been a cascade of disasters, attacks, and opportunism, all of it adding up to Gotterdammerung. A terrorist attack here, a lethal counteroffensive there from an overreactive government... Before long, they'd made short work of the world.
-->

彼はインターネットをシャットダウンさせる方法について考えているうちに眠りおちた。そして夢を見た。彼がネットワークの唯一の保守者になる悪夢だった。
<!--
He fell asleep thinking about the logistics of shutting down the Internet, and dreamed bad dreams in which he was the network's sole defender.
-->

彼はカサカサいう紙のような落ち着かない音で目が覚めた。寝返りを打つとヴァンが上体を起こしているのが見えた。彼は上着をひじのところまでまくりあげると、必死に細い腕をかいていた。コーンビーフのような色になり、ひどいありさまだった。カフェテリアの窓から差し込んでくる光で皮膚の破片が雲のように舞い上がっているのが見えた。
<!--
He woke to a papery, itchy sound. He rolled over and saw that Van was sitting up, his jacket balled up in his lap, vigorously scratching his skinny arms. They'd gone the color of corned beef, and had a scaly look. In the light streaming through the cafeteria windows, skin motes floated and danced in great clouds.
-->

「なにやってるんだ。」

フェリックスは起き上がると。ヴァンの指の爪が肌に食い込むのを見るとフィリックスまでかゆみを感じた。ヴァンが最後に頭を洗ったのは３日前だった。まるで卵を産む虫がわざわざ彼の頭を選んで住みついているように感じられていた。
ヴァンは昨夜メガネを調整していた。そして耳の後ろを触った。彼の指は分厚い油分で光っていた。彼は２、３日シャワーを浴びないと耳の後ろに吹き出物ができるのだった。そしてときには巨大で根の深いなはれものがケロイド状になり強烈な臭いを発するのだった。
<!--
"What are you doing?" Felix sat up. Watching Van's fingernails rip into his skin made him itch in sympathy. It had been three days since he'd last washed his hair and his scalp sometimes felt like there were little egg-laying insects picking their way through it. He'd adjusted his glasses the night before and had touched the backs of his ears; his finger came away shining with thick sebum. He got blackheads in the backs of his ears when he didn't shower for a couple days, and sometimes gigantic, deep boils that Kelly finally popped with sick relish.
-->

「掻いてんだよ。」

彼はそう言うと頭に取りかかった。フケの雲が舞い上がり、彼の頭頂のすでに引き剥がしたフケに加わった。

「くそっ。もうそこらじゅうがかゆいんだよ。」
<!--
"Scratching," Van said. He went to work on his head, sending a cloud of dandruff-crud into the sky, there to join the scurf that he'd already eliminated from his extremeties. "Christ, I itch all over."
-->

フェリックスはマックチーズ市長をヴァンのバックパックから取り出すと、床じゅうにへびのように這っているイーサネットケーブルをプラグへ差し込んだ。
彼はグーグルでヴァンの症状に関する考えられるすべての単語を検索した。「かゆみ」には40,600,000のリンクが表示された。彼は対象を絞ろうとさらに検索単語を追加した。
<!--
Felix took Mayor McCheese from Van's backpack and plugged it into one of the Ethernet cables that snaked all over the floor. He googled everything he could think of that could be related to this. "Itchy" yielded 40,600,000 links. He tried compound queries and got slightly more discriminating links.
-->

「たぶんストレス性の湿疹だ。」

フェリックスは検索結果から答えた。
<!--
"I think it's stress-related excema," Felix said, finally.
-->

「湿疹なんかじゃない。」

ヴァンがそう言うと、
<!--
"I don't get excema," Van said.
-->
フェリックスは彼にぞっとする赤く腫れ上がった肌、白くかさかさになった皮膚の写真を見せた。

「ストレス性の湿疹」

フェリックスは写真についたキャプションを声に出して読んだ。
<!--
Felix showed him some lurid photos of red, angry skin flaked with white. "Stress-related excema," he said, reading the caption.
-->

ヴァンは自分の腕を丹念に調べ、言った。

「湿疹だ。」

<!--
Van examined his arms. "I have excema," he said.
-->

「ここに書いてある。保湿コルチゾンクリームを塗ってください。2階のトイレにある救急セットにあるかも。たしかあったはずだ。」

多くのシスアドと同様に、フェリックスはオフィスとトイレ、台所や倉庫をくまなく探して、ショルダーバッグにトイレットペーパーをパワーバーと一緒にしまいこんでいた。
暗黙の了解としてカフェテリアでは食べ物を分け合っていたが、みんな誰かが大食いしていないか、貯め込んでいないかを見張っていた。
みんな食糧の貯め込み、飲食がおこなわれていることを知っていた。みんなそのことで罪の意識を感じていたのだから。
<!--
"Says here to keep it moisturized and to try cortisone cream. You might try the first aid kit in the second-floor toilets. I think I saw some there." Like all of the sysadmins, Felix had had a bit of a rummage around the offices, bathrooms, kitchen and store-rooms, squirreling away a roll of toilet-paper in his shoulder-bag along with three or four power-bars. They were sharing out the food in the caf by unspoken agreement, every sysadmin watching every other for signs of gluttony and hoarding. All were convinced that there was hoarding and gluttony going on out of eyeshot, because all were guilty of it themselves when no one else was watching.
-->

ヴァンは起き上がり顔を照明の方に向けると、フィリックスは彼の目が充血しているのがわかった。
「メーリングリストに抗ヒスタミン剤をたのんどくよ」
生存者により作成された４つのメーリングリストと３つのWikiが最初のミーティングのあとすぐ作成されたが、数日が過ぎた現在では１つに落ち着いていた。
フィリックスは彼の頼りになる５人の友人とのメーリングリストにも参加していたが、そのなかの２人は別の国のケージの中にいた。
彼は他の場所のシスアド達も同じように過ごしているだろうと考えていた。
<!--
Van got up and when his face hove into the light, Felix saw how puffed his eyes were. "I'll post to the mailing-list for some antihistamine," Felix said. There had been four mailing lists and three wikis for the survivors in the building within hours of the first meeting's close, and in the intervening days they'd settled on just one. Felix was still on a little mailing list with five of his most trusted friends, two of whom were trapped in cages in other countries. He suspected that the rest of the sysadmins were doing the same.-->

ヴァンはよろめきながら立ち上がると、「選挙がんばれよな」とフィリックスの肩をたたいた。
<!--
Van stumbled off. "Good luck on the elections," he said, patting Felix on the shoulder.
-->

フィリックスは立ち上がるり、よごれた窓へ駆け寄るとの外を見た。トロントではまだ火が消えておらず、むしろ勢いを増しているようだった。
彼はトロントの誰かがメーリングリストかブログにポストしていないか確かめ
たが、見つけることができたのは別のデータセンターでほかの技術者により運
用されているものだった。生存者の中にはメーリングリストやブログに投稿す
るよりも大事なことがあるのはあ当然だったし、そのほうがありそうなこと
だった。彼の家の電話は2回に1回はまだ動いていたが、二日目には電話するこ
とを止めていた。ボイスメールのケーリの声を50回目に聴いたときには、彼は
ミーティング中にもかかわらず泣いた。彼一人ではなかった。
<!--
Felix stood and paced, stopping to stare out the grubby windows. The fires still burned in Toronto, more than before. He'd tried to find mailing lists or blogs that Torontonians were posting to, but the only ones he'd found were being run by other geeks in other data-centers. It was possible—likely, even—that there were survivors out there who had more pressing priorities than posting to the Internet. His home phone still worked about half the time but he'd stopped calling it after the second day, when hearing Kelly's voice on the voicemail for the fiftieth time had made him cry in the middle of a planning meeting. He wasn't the only one.
-->

投票日。自ら選んだ結果なのだ。
<!-- Election day. Time to face the music. -->

> 緊張してる？
<!-- > Are you nervous? -->

> いいや。
<!-- > Nope, -->

フィリックスはタイプすると続けた。
<!-- Felix typed. -->

> 正直いうと、ぼくが勝つかは気にしてないんだ。ぼくはただぼくらが選挙をお
> こなったことがうれしいんだ。これをしなきゃ、誰かがドアを外から開けて
> くれるのを待ってるしかなかったから。
<!-- > I don't much care if I win, to be honest. I'm just glad we're doing this. The alternative was sitting around with our thumbs up our ass, waiting for someone to crack up and open the door. -->

カーソルがハングした。クイーンコングはフル稼働でグーグルサーバ群で自らのグーグロイドを指
揮し彼女のデータセンターを落さないよう必死だった。海外にあるケージある
グーグルサーバのうち3つが落ち、6つ冗長ネットワークのうち2つのネットワー
ク・リンクが悲鳴をあげていた。幸運なことに1秒間のクエリ数は落ち込んで
いた。
<!-- 
The cursor hung. Queen Kong was very high latency as she bossed her gang of Googloids around the Googleplex, doing everything she could to keep her data center online. Three of the offshore cages had gone offline and two of their six redundant network links were smoked. Lucky for her, queries-per-second were way down.
-->

> 中国はまだある。
<!-- > There's still China -->

she typed. Queen Kong had a big board with a map of the world colored in Google-queries-per-second, and could do magic with it, showing the drop-off over time in colorful charts. She'd uploaded lots of video clips showing how the plague and the bombs had swept the world: the initial upswell of queries from people wanting to find out what was going on, then the grim, precipitous shelving off as the plagues took hold.

> China's still running about ninety percent nominal.

Felix shook his head.

> You can't think that they're responsible

> No

she typed, but then she started to key something and then stopped.

> No of course not. I believe the Popovich Hypothesis. Every asshole in the world is using the other assholes for cover. But China put them down harder and faster than anyone else. Maybe we've finally found a use for totalitarian states.

Felix couldn't resist. He typed:

> You're lucky your boss can't see you type that. You guys were pretty enthusiastic participants in the Great Firewall of China.

> Wasn't my idea

she typed.

> And my boss is dead. They're probably all dead. The whole Bay Area got hit hard, and then there was the quake.

They'd watched the USGS's automated data-stream from the 6.9 that trashed northern Cal from Gilroy to Sebastapol. Soma webcams revealed the scope of the damage—gas main explosions, seismically retrofitted buildings crumpling like piles of children's blocks after a good kicking. The Googleplex, floating on a series of gigantic steel springs, had shook like a plateful of jello, but the racks had stayed in place and the worst injury they'd had was a badly bruised eye on a sysadmin who'd caught a flying cable-crimper in the face.

> Sorry. I forgot.

> It's OK. We all lost people, right?

> Yeah. Yeah. Anyway, I'm not worried about the election. Whoever wins, at least we're doing SOMETHING

> Not if they vote for one of the fuckrags

Fuckrag was the epithet that some of the sysadmins were using to describe the contingent that wanted to shut down the Internet. Queen Kong had coined it—apparently it had started life as a catch-all term to describe clueless IT managers that she'd chewed up through her career.

> They won't. They're just tired and sad is all. Your endorsement will carry the day

The Googloids were one of the largest and most powerful blocs left behind, along with the satellite uplink crews and the remaining transoceanic crews. Queen Kong's endorsement had come as a surprise and he'd sent her an email that she'd replied to tersely: "can't have the fuckrags in charge."

> gtg

she typed and then her connection dropped. He fired up a browser and called up google.com. The browser timed out. He hit reload, and then again, and then the Google front-page came back up. Whatever had hit Queen Kong's workplace—power failure, worms, another quake—she had fixed it. He snorted when he saw that they'd replaced the O's in the Google logo with little planet Earths with mushroom clouds rising from them.

=== 第九 ===
"Got anything to eat?" Van said to him. It was mid-afternoon, not that time particularly passed in the data-center. Felix patted his pockets. They'd put a quartermaster in charge, but not before everyone had snagged some chow out of the machines. He'd had a dozen power-bars and some apples. He'd taken a couple sandwiches but had wisely eaten them first before they got stale.

"One power-bar left," he said. He'd noticed a certain looseness in his waistline that morning and had briefly relished it. Then he'd remembered Kelly's teasing about his weight and he'd cried some. Then he'd eaten two power bars, leaving him with just one left.

"Oh," Van said. His face was hollower than ever, his shoulders sloping in on his toast-rack chest.

"Here," Felix said. "Vote Felix."

Van took the power-bar from him and then put it down on the table. "OK, I want to give this back to you and say, 'No, I couldn't,' but I'm fucking hungry, so I'm just going to take it and eat it, OK?"

"That's fine by me," Felix said. "Enjoy."

"How are the elections coming?" Van said, once he'd licked the wrapper clean.

"Dunno," Felix said. "Haven't checked in a while." He'd been winning by a slim margin a few hours before. Not having his laptop was a major handicap when it came to stuff like this. Up in the cages, there were a dozen more like him, poor bastards who'd left the house on Der Tag without thinking to snag something WiFi-enabled.

"You're going to get smoked," Sario said, sliding in next to them. He'd become famous in the center for never sleeping, for eavesdropping, for picking fights in RL that had the ill-considered heat of a Usenet flamewar. "The winner will be someone who understands a couple of fundamental facts." He held up a fist, then ticked off his bullet points by raising a finger at a time. "Point: The terrorists are using the Internet to destroy the world, and we need to destroy the Internet first. Point: Even if I'm wrong, the whole thing is a joke. We'll run out of generator-fuel soon enough. Point: Or if we don't, it will be because the old world will be back and running, and it won't give a crap about your new world. Point: We're gonna run out of food before we run out of shit to argue about or reasons not to go outside. We have the chance to do something to help the world recover: we can kill the net and cut it off as a tool for bad guys. Or we can rearrange some more deck chairs on the bridge of your personal Titanic in the service of some sweet dream about an 'independent cyberspace.'"

The thing was that Sario was right. They would be out of fuel in two days—intermittent power from the grid had stretched their generator lifespan. And if you bought his hypothesis that the Internet was primarily being used as a tool to organize more mayhem, shutting it down would be the right thing to do.

But Felix's son and his wife were dead. He didn't want to rebuild the old world. He wanted a new one. The old world was one that didn't have any place for him. Not anymore.

Van scratched his raw, flaking skin. Puffs of dander and scurf swirled in the musty, greasy air. Sario curled a lip at him. "That is disgusting. We're breathing recycled air, you know. Whatever leprosy is eating you, aerosolizing it into the air supply is pretty anti-social."

"You're the world's leading authority on anti-social, Sario," Van said. "Go away or I'll multi-tool you to death." He stopped scratching and patted his sheathed multi-pliers like a gunslinger.

"Yeah, I'm anti-social. I've got Asperger's and I haven't taken any meds in four days. What's your fucking excuse."

Van scratched some more. "I'm sorry," he said. "I didn't know."

Sario cracked up. "Oh, you are priceless. I'd bet that three quarters of this bunch is borderline autistic. Me, I'm just an asshole. But I'm one who isn't afraid to tell the truth, and that makes me better than you, dickweed."

"Fuckrag," Felix said, "fuck off."

=== 第十 ===
They had less than a day's worth of fuel when Felix was elected the first ever Prime Minister of Cyberspace. The first count was spoiled by a bot that spammed the voting process and they lost a critical day while they added up the votes a second time.

But by then, it was all seeming like more of a joke. Half the data-centers had gone dark. Queen Kong's net-maps of Google queries were looking grimmer and grimmer as more of the world went offline, though she maintained a leader-board of new and rising queries—largely related to health, shelter, sanitation and self-defense.

Worm-load slowed. Power was going off to many home PC users, and staying off, so their compromised PCs were going dark. The backbones were still lit up and blinking, but the missives from those data-centers were looking more and more desperate. Felix hadn't eaten in a day and neither had anyone in a satellite Earth-station of transoceanic head-end.

Water was running short, too.

Popovich and Rosenbaum came and got him before he could do more than answer a few congratulatory messages and post a canned acceptance speech to newsgroups.

"We're going to open the doors," Popovich said. Like all of them, he'd lost weight and waxed scruffy and oily. His BO was like a cloud coming off a trash-bags behind a fish-market on a sunny day. Felix was quite sure he smelled no better.

"You're going to go for a reccy? Get more fuel? We can charter a working group for it—great idea."

Rosenbaum shook his head sadly. "We're going to go find our families. Whatever is out there has burned itself out. Or it hasn't. Either way, there's no future in here."

"What about network maintenance?" Felix said, thought he knew the answers. "Who'll keep the routers up?"

"We'll give you the root passwords to everything," Popovich said. His hands were shaking and his eyes were bleary. Like many of the smokers stuck in the data-center, he'd gone cold turkey this week. They'd run out of caffeine products two days earlier, too. The smokers had it rough.

"And I'll just stay here and keep everything online?"

"You and anyone else who cares anymore."

Felix knew that he'd squandered his opportunity. The election had seemed noble and brave, but in hindsight all it had been was an excuse for infighting when they should have been figuring out what to do next. The problem was that there was nothing to do next.

"I can't make you stay," he said.

"Yeah, you can't." Popovich turned on his heel and walked out. Rosenbaum watched him go, then he gripped Felix's shoulder and squeezed it.

"Thank you, Felix. It was a beautiful dream. It still is. Maybe we'll find something to eat and some fuel and come back."

Rosenbaum had a sister whom he'd been in contact with over IM for the first days after the crisis broke. Then she'd stopped answering. The sysadmins were split among those who'd had a chance to say goodbye and those who hadn't. Each was sure the other had it better.

They posted about it on the internal newsgroup—they were still geeks, after all, and there was a little honor guard on the ground floor, geeks who watched them pass toward the double doors. They manipulated the keypads and the steel shutters lifted, then the first set of doors opened. They stepped into the vestibule and pulled the doors shut behind them. The front doors opened. It was very bright and sunny outside, and apart from how empty it was, it looked very normal. Heartbreakingly so.

The two took a tentative step out into the world. Then another. They turned to wave at the assembled masses. Then they both grabbed their throats and began to jerk and twitch, crumpling in a heap on the ground.

"Shiii—!" was all Felix managed to choke out before they both dusted themselves off and stood up, laughing so hard they were clutching their sides. They waved once more and turned on their heels.

"Man, those guys are sick," Van said. He scratched his arms, which had long, bloody scratches on them. His clothes were so covered in scurf they looked like they'd been dusted with icing sugar.

"I thought it was pretty funny," Felix said.

"Christ I'm hungry," Van said, conversationally.

"Lucky for you, we've got all the packets we can eat," Felix said.

"You're too good to us grunts, Mr President," Van said.

"Prime Minister," he said. "And you're no grunt, you're the Deputy Prime Minister. You're my designated ribbon-cutter and hander-out of oversized novelty checks."

It buoyed both of their spirits. Watching Popovich and Rosenbaum go, it buoyed them up. Felix knew then that they'd all be going soon.

That had been pre-ordained by the fuel-supply, but who wanted to wait for the fuel to run out, anyway?

=== 第十一 ===
> half my crew split this morning

Queen Kong typed. Google was holding up pretty good anyway, of course. The load on the servers was a lot lighter than it had been since the days when Google fit on a bunch of hand-built PCs under a desk at Stanford.

> we're down to a quarter

Felix typed back. It was only a day since Popovich and Rosenbaum left, but the traffic on the newsgroups had fallen down to near zero. He and Van hadn't had much time to play Republic of Cyberspace. They'd been too busy learning the systems that Popovich had turned over to them, the big, big routers that had went on acting as the major interchange for all the network backbones in Canada.

Still, someone posted to the newsgroups every now and again, generally to say goodbye. The old flamewars about who would be PM, or whether they would shut down the network, or who took too much food—it was all gone.

He reloaded the newsgroup. There was a typical message.

> Runaway processes on Solaris TK

>

> Uh, hi. I'm just a lightweight MSCE but I'm the only one awake here and four of the DSLAMs just went down. Looks like there's some custom accounting code that's trying to figure out how much to bill our corporate customers and it's spawned ten thousand threads and its eating all the swap. I just want to kill it but I can't seem to do that. Is there some magic invocation I need to do to get this goddamned weenix box to kill this shit? I mean, it's not as if any of our customers are ever going to pay us again. I'd ask the guy who wrote this code, but he's pretty much dead as far as anyone can work out.

He reloaded. There was a response. It was short, authoritative, and helpful—just the sort of thing you almost never saw in a high-caliber newsgroup when a noob posted a dumb question. The apocalypse had awoken the spirit of patient helpfulness in the world's sysop community.

Van shoulder-surfed him. "Holy shit, who knew he had it in him?"

He looked at the message again. It was from Will Sario.

He dropped into his chat window.

> sario i thought you wanted the network dead why are you helping msces fix their boxen?

> Gee Mr PM, maybe I just can't bear to watch a computer suffer at the hands of an amateur.

He flipped to the channel with Queen Kong in it.

> How long?

> Since I slept? Two days. Until we run out of fuel? Three days. Since we ran out of food? Two days.

> Jeez. I didn't sleep last night either. We're a little short handed around here.

> asl? Im monica and I live in pasadena and Im bored with my homework. WOuld you like to download my pic???

The trojan bots were all over IRC these days, jumping to every channel that had any traffic on it. Sometimes you caught five or six flirting with each other. It was pretty weird to watch a piece of malware try to con another instance of itself into downloading a trojan.

They both kicked the bot off the channel simultaneously. He had a script for it now. The spam hadn't even tailed off a little.

> How come the spam isn't reducing? Half the goddamned data-centers have gone dark

Queen Kong paused a long time before typing. As had become automatic when she went high-latency, he reloaded the Google homepage. Sure enough, it was down.

> Sario, you got any food?

> You won't miss a couple more meals, Your Excellency

Van had gone back to Mayor McCheese but he was in the same channel.

"What a dick. You're looking pretty buff, though, dude."

Van didn't look so good. He looked like you could knock him over with a stiff breeze and he had a phlegmy, weak quality to his speech.

> hey kong everything ok?

> everything's fine just had to go kick some ass

"How's the traffic, Van?"

"Down 25 percent from this morning," he said. There were a bunch of nodes whose connections routed through them. Presumably most of these were home or commercial customers in places where the power was still on and the phone company's COs were still alive.

Every once in a while, Felix would wiretap the connections to see if he could find a person who had news of the wide world. Almost all of it was automated traffic, though: network backups, status updates. Spam. Lots of spam.

> Spam's still up because the services that stop spam are failing faster than the services that create it. All the anti-worm stuff is centralized in a couple places. The bad stuff is on a million zombie computers. If only the lusers had had the good sense to turn off their home PCs before keeling over or taking off

> at the rate were going well be routing nothing but spam by dinnertime

Van cleared his throat, a painful sound. "About that," he said. "I think it's going to hit sooner than that. Felix, I don't think anyone would notice if we just walked away from here."

Felix looked at him, his skin the color of corned-beef and streaked with long, angry scabs. His fingers trembled.

"You drinking enough water?"

Van nodded. "All frigging day, every ten seconds. Anything to keep my belly full." He pointed to a refilled Pepsi Max bottle full of water by his side.

"Let's have a meeting," he said.

=== 第十二 ===
There had been forty-three of them on D-Day. Now there were fifteen. Six had responded to the call for a meeting by simply leaving. Everyone knew without having to be told what the meeting was about.

"So that's it, you're going to let it all fall apart?" Sario was the only one with the energy left to get properly angry. He'd go angry to his grave. The veins on his throat and forehead stood out angrily. His fists shook angrily. All the other geeks went lids-down at the site of him, looking up in unison for once at the discussion, not keeping one eye on a chat-log or a tailed service log.

"Sario, you've got to be shitting me," Felix said. "You wanted to pull the goddamned plug!"

"I wanted it to go clean," he shouted. "I didn't want it to bleed out and keel over in little gasps and pukes forever. I wanted it to be an act of will by the global community of its caretakers. I wanted it to be an affirmative act by human hands. Not entropy and bad code and worms winning out. Fuck that, that's just what's happened out there."

Up in the top-floor cafeteria, there were windows all around, hardened and light-bending, and by custom, they were all blinds-down. Now Sario ran around the room, yanking down the blinds. How the hell can he get the energy to run? Felix wondered. He could barely walk up the stairs to the meeting room.

Harsh daylight flooded in. It was a fine sunny day out there, but everywhere you looked across that commanding view of Toronto's skyline, there were rising plumes of smoke. The TD tower, a gigantic black modernist glass brick, was gouting flame to the sky. "It's all falling apart, the way everything does.

"Listen, listen. If we leave the network to fall over slowly, parts of it will stay online for months. Maybe years. And what will run on it? Malware. Worms. Spam. System-processes. Zone transfers. The things we use fall apart and require constant maintenance. The things we abandon don't get used and they last forever. We're going to leave the network behind like a lime-pit filled with industrial waste. That will be our fucking legacy—the legacy of every keystroke you and I and anyone, anywhere ever typed. You understand? We're going to leave it to die slow like a wounded dog, instead of giving it one clean shot through the head."

Van scratched his cheeks, then Felix saw that he was wiping away tears.

"Sario, you're not wrong, but you're not right either," he said. "Leaving it up to limp along is right. We're going to all be limping for a long time, and maybe it will be some use to someone. If there's one packet being routed from any user to any other user, anywhere in the world, it's doing its job."

"If you want a clean kill, you can do that," Felix said. "I'm the PM and I say so. I'm giving you root. All of you." He turned to the white-board where the cafeteria workers used to scrawl the day's specials. Now it was covered with the remnants of heated technical debates that the sysadmins had engaged in over the days since the day.

He scrubbed away a clean spot with his sleeve and began to write out long, complicated alphanumeric passwords salted with punctuation. Felix had a gift for remembering that kind of password. He doubted it would do him much good, ever again.

=== 第十三 ===
> Were going, kong. Fuels almost out anyway

> yeah well thats right then. it was an honor, mr prime minister

> you going to be ok?

> ive commandeered a young sysadmin to see to my feminine needs and weve found another cache of food thatll last us a coupel weeks now that were down to fifteen admins—im in hog heaven pal

> youre amazing, Queen Kong, seriously. Dont be a hero though. When you need to go go. Theres got to be something out there

> be safe felix, seriously—btw did i tell you queries are up in Romania? maybe theyre getting back on their feet

> really?

> yeah, really. we're hard to kill—like fucking roaches

Her connection died. He dropped to Firefox and reloaded Google and it was down. He hit reload and hit reload and hit reload, but it didn't come up. He closed his eyes and listened to Van scratch his legs and then heard Van type a little.

"They're back up," he said.

Felix whooshed out a breath. He sent the message to the newsgroup, one that he'd run through five drafts before settling on, "Take care of the place, OK? We'll be back, someday."

Everyone was going except Sario. Sario wouldn't leave. He came down to see them off, though.

The sysadmins gathered in the lobby and Felix made the safety door go up, and the light rushed in.

Sario stuck his hand out.

"Good luck," he said.

"You too," Felix said. He had a firm grip, Sario, stronger than he had any right to be. "Maybe you were right," he said.

"Maybe," he said.

"You going to pull the plug?"

Sario looked up at the drop-ceiling, seeming to peer through the reinforced floors at the humming racks above. "Who knows?" he said at last.

Van scratched and a flurry of white motes danced in the sunlight.

"Let's go find you a pharmacy," Felix said. He walked to the door and the other sysadmins followed.

They waited for the interior doors to close behind them and then Felix opened the exterior doors. The air smelled and tasted like a mown grass, like the first drops of rain, like the lake and the sky, like the outdoors and the world, an old friend not heard from in an eternity.

"Bye, Felix," the other sysadmins said. They were drifting away while he stood transfixed at the top of the short concrete staircase. The light hurt his eyes and made them water.

"I think there's a Shopper's Drug Mart on King Street," he said to Van. "We'll throw a brick through the window and get you some cortisone, OK?"

"You're the Prime Minister," Van said. "Lead on."

=== 第十四 ===
They didn't see a single soul on the fifteen minute walk. There wasn't a single sound except for some bird noises and some distant groans, and the wind in the electric cables overhead. It was like walking on the surface of the moon.

"Bet they have chocolate bars at the Shopper's," Van said.

Felix's stomach lurched. Food. "Wow," he said, around a mouthful of saliva.

They walked past a little hatchback and in the front seat was the dried body of a woman holding the dried body of a baby, and his mouth filled with sour bile, even though the smell was faint through the rolled-up windows.

He hadn't thought of Kelly or 2.0 in days. He dropped to his knees and retched again. Out here in the real world, his family was dead. Everyone he knew was dead. He just wanted to lie down on the sidewalk and wait to die, too.

Van's rough hands slipped under his armpits and hauled weakly at him. "Not now," he said. "Once we're safe inside somewhere and we've eaten something, then and then you can do this, but not now. Understand me, Felix? Not fucking now."

The profanity got through to him. He got to his feet. His knees were trembling.

"Just a block more," Van said, and slipped Felix's arm around his shoulders and led him along.

"Thank you, Van. I'm sorry."

"No sweat," he said. "You need a shower, bad. No offense."

"None taken."

The Shoppers had a metal security gate, but it had been torn away from the front windows, which had been rudely smashed. Felix and Van squeezed through the gap and stepped into the dim drug-store. A few of the displays were knocked over, but other than that, it looked OK. By the cash-registers, Felix spotted the racks of candy bars at the same instant that Van saw them, and they hurried over and grabbed a handful each, stuffing their faces.

"You two eat like pigs."

They both whirled at the sound of the woman's voice. She was holding a fire-axe that was nearly as big as she was. She wore a lab-coat and comfortable shoes.

"You take what you need and go, OK? No sense in there being any trouble." Her chin was pointy and her eyes were sharp. She looked to be in her forties. She looked nothing like Kelly, which was good, because Felix felt like running and giving her a hug as it was. Another person alive!

"Are you a doctor?" Felix said. She was wearing scrubs under the coat, he saw.

"You going to go?" She brandished the axe.

Felix held his hands up. "Seriously, are you a doctor? A pharmacist?"

"I used to be a RN, ten years ago. I'm mostly a Web-designer."

"You're shitting me," Felix said.

"Haven't you ever met a girl who knew about computers?"

"Actually, a friend of mine who runs Google's data-center is a girl. A woman, I mean."

"You're shitting me," she said. "A woman ran Google's data-center?"

"Runs," Felix said. "It's still online."

"NFW," she said. She let the axe lower.

"Way. Have you got any cortisone cream? I can tell you the story. My name's Felix and this is Van, who needs any anti-histamines you can spare."

"I can spare? Felix old pal, I have enough dope here to last a hundred years. This stuff's going to expire long before it runs out. But are you telling me that the net's still up?"

"It's still up," he said. "Kind of. That's what we've been doing all week. Keeping it online. It might not last much longer, though."

"No," she said. "I don't suppose it would." She set the axe down. "Have you got anything to trade? I don't need much, but I've been trying to keep my spirits up by trading with the neighbors. It's like playing civilization."

"You have neighbors?"

"At least ten," she said. "The people in the restaurant across the way make a pretty good soup, even if most of the veg is canned. They cleaned me out of Sterno, though."

"You've got neighbors and you trade with them?"

"Well, nominally. It'd be pretty lonely without them. I've taken care of whatever sniffles I could. Set a bone—broken wrist. Listen, do you want some Wonder Bread and peanut butter? I have a ton of it. Your friend looks like he could use a meal."

"Yes please," Van said. "We don't have anything to trade, but we're both committed workaholics looking to learn a trade. Could you use some assistants?"

"Not really." She spun her axe on its head. "But I wouldn't mind some company."

They ate the sandwiches and then some soup. The restaurant people brought it over and made their manners at them, though Felix saw their noses wrinkle up and ascertained that there was working plumbing in the back room. Van went in to take a sponge bath and then he followed.

"None of us know what to do," the woman said. Her name was Rosa, and she had found them a bottle of wine and some disposable plastic cups from the housewares aisle. "I thought we'd have helicopters or tanks or even looters, but it's just quiet."

"You seem to have kept pretty quiet yourself," Felix said.

"Didn't want to attract the wrong kind of attention."

"You ever think that maybe there's a lot of people out there doing the same thing? Maybe if we all get together we'll come up with something to do."

"Or maybe they'll cut our throats," she said.

Van nodded. "She's got a point."

Felix was on his feet. "No way, we can't think like that. Lady, we're at a critical juncture here. We can go down through negligence, dwindling away in our hiding holes, or we can try to build something better."

"Better?" She made a rude noise.

"OK, not better. Something though. Building something new is better than letting it dwindle away. Christ, what are you going to do when you've read all the magazines and eaten all the potato chips here?"

Rosa shook her head. "Pretty talk," she said. "But what the hell are we going to do, anyway?"

"Something," Felix said. "We're going to do something. Something is better than nothing. We're going to take this patch of the world where people are talking to each other, and we're going to expand it. We're going to find everyone we can and we're going to take care of them and they're going to take care of us. We'll probably fuck it up. We'll probably fail. I'd rather fail than give up, though."

Van laughed. "Felix, you are crazier than Sario, you know it?"

"We're going to go and drag him out, first thing tomorrow. He's going to be a part of this, too. Everyone will. Screw the end of the world. The world doesn't end. Humans aren't the kind of things that have endings."

Rosa shook her head again, but she was smiling a little now. "And you'll be what, the Pope-Emperor of the World?"

"He prefers Prime Minister," Van said in a stagey whisper. The anti-histamines had worked miracles on his skin, and it had faded from angry red to a fine pink.

"You want to be Minister of Health, Rosa?" he said.

"Boys," she said. "Playing games. How about this. I'll help out however I can, provided you never ask me to call you Prime Minister and you never call me the Minister of Health?"

"It's a deal," he said.

Van refilled their glasses, upending the wine bottle to get the last few drops out.

They raised their glasses. "To the world," Felix said. "To humanity." He thought hard. "To rebuilding."

"To anything," Van said.

"To anything," Felix said. "To everything."

"To everything," Rosa said.

They drank. He wanted to go see the house—see Kelly and 2.0, though his stomach churned at the thought of what he might find there. But the next day, they started to rebuild. And months later, they started over again, when disagreements drove apart the fragile little group they'd pulled together. And a year after that, they started over again. And five years later, they started again.

It was nearly six months before he went home. Van helped him along, riding cover behind him on the bicycles they used to get around town. The further north they rode, the stronger the smell of burnt wood became. There were lots of burnt-out houses. Sometimes marauders burnt the houses they'd looted, but more often it was just nature, the kinds of fires you got in forests and on mountains. There were six choking, burnt blocks where every house was burnt before they reached home.

But Felix's old housing development was still standing, an oasis of eerily pristine buildings that looked like maybe their somewhat neglectful owners had merely stepped out to buy some paint and fresh lawnmower blades to bring their old homes back up to their neat, groomed selves.

That was worse, somehow. He got off the bike at the entry of the subdivision and they walked the bikes together in silence, listening to the sough of the wind in the trees. Winter was coming late that year, but it was coming, and as the sweat dried in the wind, Felix started to shiver.

He didn't have his keys anymore. They were at the data-center, months and worlds away. He tried the door-handle, but it didn't turn. He applied his shoulder to the door and it ripped away from its wet, rotted jamb with a loud, splintering sound. The house was rotting from the inside.

The door splashed when it landed. The house was full of stagnant water, four inches of stinking pond-scummed water in the living room. He splashed carefully through it, feeling the floor-boards sag spongily beneath each step.

Up the stairs, his nose full of that terrible green mildewy stench. Into the bedroom, the furniture familiar as a childhood friend.

Kelly was in the bed with 2.0. The way they both lay, it was clear they hadn't gone easy—they were twisted double, Kelly curled around 2.0. Their skin was bloated, making them almost unrecognizable. The smell—God, the smell.

Felix's head spun. He thought he would fall over and clutched at the dresser. An emotion he couldn't name—rage, anger, sorrow?—made him breathe hard, gulp for air like he was drowning.

And then it was over. The world was over. Kelly and 2.0—over. And he had a job to do. He folded the blanket over them—Van helped, solemnly. They went into the front yard and took turns digging, using the shovel from the garage that Kelly had used for gardening. They had lots of experience digging graves by then. Lots of experience handling the dead. They dug, and wary dogs watched them from the tall grass on the neighboring lawns, but they were also good at chasing off dogs with well-thrown stones.

When the grave was dug, they laid Felix's wife and son to rest in it. Felix quested after words to say over the mound, but none came. He'd dug so many graves for so many men's wives and so many women's husbands and so many children—the words were long gone.

Felix dug ditches and salvaged cans and buried the dead. He planted and harvested. He fixed some cars and learned to make biodiesel. Finally he fetched up in a data-center for a little government—little governments came and went, but this one was smart enough to want to keep records and needed someone to keep everything running, and Van went with him.

They spent a lot of time in chat rooms and sometimes they happened upon old friends from the strange time they'd spent running the Distributed Republic of Cyberspace, geeks who insisted on calling him PM, though no one in the real world ever called him that anymore.

It wasn't a good life, most of the time. Felix's wounds never healed, and neither did most other people's. There were lingering sicknesses and sudden ones. Tragedy on tragedy.

But Felix liked his data-center. There in the humming of the racks, he never felt like it was the first days of a better nation, but he never felt like it was the last days of one, either.

> go to bed, felix

> soon, kong, soon—almost got this backup running

> youre a junkie, dude.

> look whos talking

He reloaded the Google homepage. Queen Kong had had it online for a couple years now. The Os in Google changed all the time, whenever she got the urge. Today they were little cartoon globes, one smiling the other frowning.

He looked at it for a long time and dropped back into a terminal to check his backup. It was running clean, for a change. The little government's records were safe.

> ok night night

> take care

Van waved at him as he creaked to the door, stretching out his back with a long series of pops.

"Sleep well, boss," he said.

"Don't stick around here all night again," Felix said. "You need your sleep, too."

"You're too good to us grunts," Van said, and went back to typing.

Felix went to the door and walked out into the night. Behind him, the biodiesel generator hummed and made its acrid fumes. The harvest moon was up, which he loved. Tomorrow, he'd go back and fix another computer and fight off entropy again. And why not?

It was what he did. He was a sysadmin.
[edit]

== 他の記事 ==
* [[Translations:When Sysadmins Ruled the Earth:en]]
* [[Translations:When Sysadmins Ruled the Earth:fr]]
* [[Translations:When Sysadmins Ruled the Earth:ja]]
* [[Translations:When Sysadmins Ruled the Earth:vi]]

[[Category:Translations]]
